james sanders spoke with julie love, senior director, microsoft quantum business development, at microsoft ignite 2019 in orlando about microsoft's role in quantum computing.
the following is a transcript of the interview.
julie love: at microsoft quantum, we're all about quantum impact.
delivering solutions, helping our customers solve their toughest compute challenges by building the world's most scalable compute stack.
it's really this ambition for scale that we took the next step on our quantum journey to deliver impact through announcing azure quantum.
azure quantum is a full end-to-end open cloud ecosystem for quantum development, really bringing the tools of quantum computing to developers at organizations, people around the world.
we're doing this building on the work that we've been doing on applications, solving tough problems like the ones that we solved with case western reserve university that satya nadella talked about this morning, our work on quantum cryptography and post quantum cryptography to secure our data in a quantum world, building on q#, our quantum native programming language in the quantum development kit, which has now been downloaded more than 200,000 times by developers around the world, and breakthroughs that we've had across devices, cryogenic controllers across the whole stack.
we've announced azure quantum to bring this ecosystem to the world together with partners.
we've partnered with ionq, honeywell, qci, and 1qbit to bring the most diverse, most scalable quantum solutions across software solutions and hardware.
cryptography is one of the areas where there's been a lot of excitement and talk because there's a notable quantum algorithm which will break modern cryptography.
microsoft is at the forefront of developing post quantum cryptographic solutions, so these are cryptographic protocols which are resistant to both classical and quantum attacks.
i think it's hard to say when exactly that will be a reality.
there is advancements happening every day across all elements of the stack.
but, we look at it from a position, is if you believe that quantum is coming, which we do, we think it's important to get ahead of this technology.
if you think that might be a possibility within the next decade, it's time for organizations to start implementing these quantum resistant protocols now, so ensuring that they have quantum agility to be able to shift their cryptographic systems to new protocols, and to start testing these systems in their environment today.
we've had quantum software efforts at microsoft for a long time, and as we developed earlier systems that we used for programming scalable quantum computers, we discovered that we really needed a new language.
and so, we developed a quantum-native language and it really understands the language of quantum mechanics.
there's a lot of things that come with having a quantum native language that make it easier and more scalable for developers to develop for that language.
for example, in quantum mechanics and quantum computing, all operations have to be reversible.
and so, q# has built in the mechanisms to take care of that for developers, and so you're not having to take care of that overhead for yourself.
it's allowed us to create really a modern programming environment with the abstraction layers needed for developers to create durable, scalable code.
our aim is also to make this incredibly accessible for developers.
we see this as a need, not just to create a language for physicists working in the lab, but for programmers around the world.
this goes back to the whole aspiration for impact.
for us to achieve the impact that we want to have from quantum computing, we need this to be accessible for a whole range of people.
not just programmers, but domain experts in areas like quantum chemistry, material science, optimization.
we've expanded on what we've offered with q# and the quantum development kit to do integrations with languages like python.
classical computers will continue to play a huge role in the quantum future.
if you think about the environment that we've deployed in azure today, it's a highly heterogeneous compute fabric where you have cpus, gpus, fpgas deployed at scale, and those are accelerators to the main core classical workloads.
for the foreseeable future, we see quantum as being one of those acceleration options that will exist within azure.
also see
industrial pcs
stanford university researchers have has built an integrated circuit to control the flow of light through a diamond chip, which could help create quantum processors that are faster than the fastest electronic computers today.
for decades, engineers have made computers smaller, faster, and cheaper by improving their fundamental component, the integrated circuit — the maze of pathways that control the flow of electricity through a silicon chip.
now, a stanford university team led by professor jelena vuckovic has built an integrated circuit to control the flow of light through a diamond chip, helping pave the way for quantum processors that, in theory, could perform some tasks, such as code-breaking, far faster than the fastest electronic computers today.
“quantum technology is roughly where electronic technology was in the early 1970s,” vuckovic said, who led the research team.
“researchers have figured out how to make very basic integrated circuits, but now they have to be scaled and made much better.”
building an optical integrated circuit in diamond is a practical step toward making quantum technologies useful.
engineers have long known how to design ordinary electronic circuits and control the electrons that help perform computational tasks.
but they are still struggling to build quantum circuits with all the necessary pathways to control photons, the basic particles in light.
to meet this design challenge, vuckovic’s lab used diamond, a crystal that can have atomic impurities that trap electrons.
a laser beam can be pointed at one of these trapped electrons, causing it to spin.
these spinning electrons — called qubits, or quantum bits — are the basis for performing quantum calculations just as transistors are the basis for performing electronic calculations.
in essence, a quantum processor would have an array of qubits connected by light flowing through an optical integrated circuit, just as an electronic computer has transistors connected by current flowing through wires.
to create their optical integrated circuit, vuckovic’s team, led by graduate student constantin dory, developed algorithms that considered the positions of the impurities that form qubits, and the ways that lasers could manipulate these qubits to perform calculations.
the algorithms also took into account the capabilities of the equipment that engineers use to make chips.
after considering all these variables together using a process called inverse design, the algorithms generated a schematic that the researchers used to fabricate their optical integrated circuit.
to date, the researchers were able to fabricate circuits consisting of six building blocks, potentially enabling interaction of only a few qubits.
to build a useful quantum processor, the researchers say they’ll have to design and build a chip with hundreds of interacting qubits, all interconnected with optical pathways, which is extremely challenging, but possible.
the stanford team is also experimenting with other crystals that may prove useful for controlling light and qubits.
vuckovic foresees one application of their diamond optical chip in the near term — spy-proofing fiber optic networks.
today, all sorts of sensitive data from bank transfers to government secrets flow as a stream of ordinary light through fiber optic cables.
spies or criminals can tap into this stream without leaving any trace.
however, if quantum light, such as a single photon, is used for communication, eavesdropping can be detected because any intrusion would leave behind subtle fingerprints.
challenges remain.
for starters, it is difficult to transmit quantum light over large distances.
vuckovic is working with several other research teams to build quantum repeaters, in which optical chips with a few qubits each, positioned at regular intervals, would be used to transmit tamper-proof quantum signals over long distances, even across continents.
“we think a long-distance quantum network is achievable within a five-year time frame,” she said.
stanford university
www.stanford.edu
– edited by chris vavra, production editor, control engineering, cfe media & technology, cvavra@cfemedia.com.
see more control engineering energy and power stories.
researchers at the university of sydney and dartmouth college have developed a new way to design quantum memory, bringing quantum computers a step closer to reality.
the results will appear june 19 in the journal nature communications.
quantum computing may revolutionize information processing, by providing a means to solve problems too complex for traditional computers, with applications in code breaking, materials science and physics.
but figuring out how to engineer such a machine, including vital subsystems like quantum memory, remains elusive.
in the worldwide drive to build a useful quantum computer, the simple-sounding task of effectively preserving quantum information in a quantum memory is a major challenge.
the same physics that makes quantum computers potentially powerful also makes them likely to experience errors, even when quantum information is just being stored idly in memory.
keeping quantum information "alive" for long periods, while remaining accessible to the computer, is a key problem.
the sydney-dartmouth team's results demonstrate a path to what is considered a holy grail in the research community: storing quantum states with high fidelity for exceptionally long times, even hours according to their calculations.
today, most quantum states survive for tiny fractions of a second.
"our new approach allows us to simultaneously achieve very low error rates and very long storage times," said co-senior author dr. michael j. biercuk, director of the quantum control laboratory in the university of sydney's school of physics and arc centre for engineered quantum systems.
"but our work also addresses a vital practical issue – providing small access latencies, enabling on-demand retrieval with only a short time lag to extract stored information."
the team's new method is based on techniques to build in error resilience at the level of the quantum memory hardware, said dartmouth physics professor lorenza viola, a co-senior author who is leading the quantum control theory effort and the quantum information initiative at dartmouth.
"we've now developed the quantum 'firmware' appropriate to control a practically useful quantum memory," added biercuk.
"but vitally, we've shown that with our approach a user may guarantee that error never grows beyond a certain level even after very long times, so long as certain constraints are met.
the conditions we establish for the memory to function as advertised then inform system engineers how they can construct an efficient and effective quantum memory.
our method even incorporates a wide variety of realistic experimental imperfections."
provided by dartmouth college
amazon is now offering some of its enterprise customers the ability to explore quantum computing over the cloud.
enterprise customers such as boeing are collaborating with amazon web services (aws) to explore how developing and testing quantum algorithms in simulations could lead to breakthroughs in advanced material research.
ibm has been offering quantum cloud computing services to select customers since 2016.
to be clear, there are no quantum computing applications in use at this time.
and no quantum computer does anything that remotely resembles practical work.
but big tech is anticipating a quantum computing age, and ibm, microsoft, and now amazon have been pestered long enough by their big enterprise customers to get started exploring this quantum future.
braket
the aws product is called braket, a name that comes from the bra-ket notation used to describe quantum states.
bra-ket notation was created by the nobel prize winning physicist paul dirac in 1939.
according to amazon, braket is currently “in preview” but will launch to all aws customers in 2020.
amazon is joining microsoft, ibm and google in the fight to commercialize quantum computing for enterprise customers.
since the computing hardware that powers quantum computers is notoriously fickle, quantum cloud computing is attractive for enterprise customers that seek to benefit from the technology without having to be responsible for quantum computing hardware maintenance and repair.
quantum computers are also incredibly expensive to build, maintain and repair.
the select amazon clients that will use braket will have access to experiment with multiple quantum computers from companies like rigetti computing, iono and d-wave systems.
microsoft, ibm and amazon are currently allowing their enterprise customers to experiment with quantum cloud computing and explore new applications to advance their specific industry interests.
but ibm has been offering enterprise customers access to its quantum computers since 2016, and microsoft announced last month that it would be offering its customers the use of multiple quantum computers, so what’s the difference between them?
the differences in ibm, microsoft and amazon’s quantum cloud computing services
the first difference is perhaps the most significant: ibm has its own quantum computers, while microsoft and amazon do not.
ibm developers can join their q network and use the open-source programming framework qiskit to interact with their quantum computers.
ibm’s q system one, touted as the world’s first integrated universal quantum computing system for commercial applications, is only accessible through the cloud.
pictured here is ibm’s q system one.
jpmorgan chase is the main financial services partner with ibm to develop and pioneer quantum computing applications for the financial industry that will improve trading, risk analysis and portfolio optimization, among other things.
daimler ag will be working with ibm to create new use cases for quantum computing in the automotive and transportation sectors, including optimizing manufacturing processes and fleet logistics, as well as exploring quantum chemistry to discover new materials.
samsung is working with the q system one over the cloud to understand how quantum computing could help improve its material science processes and explore the impact it may have on the company’s semiconductor and electronics interests.
(image courtesy of ibm.)
microsoft announced its quantum computing cloud service azure quantum in early november.
azure quantum offers both free and paid access to prototype quantum computers, as does ibm’s q network.
azure quantum is not available at this time.
microsoft’s quantum hardware partners are honeywell, ionq and qci.
honeywell and ionq use quantum processors that write data using single ions that cannot escape electromagnetic fields.
qci uses the other approach to quantum computing hardware.
it uses superconductive circuitry, which is also the technique favored by google, ibm and amazon.
microsoft has at least one partner involved in azure quantum: dow chemical, which is exploring quantum computing to make headway on extremely difficult chemistry problems.
its service will be open to the public soon.
amazon’s braket is using ionq (like microsoft) and two others: the d-wave 2000q and the rigetti 16q aspen-4.
as an addendum to the unveiling of braket, amazon announced that it is opening a new facility: aws center for quantum computing.
it will be located near the caltech campus in pasadena, calif., which will give some of the brightest minds on the planet access to a few things: amazon’s quantum computing experts, a world-class facility, and other researchers who will join them in their experiments and work.
amazon is hoping the center will yield new technologies and innovations that will propel the company toward its goal of figuring out how to mass produce quantum computers and recognize which applications and problems are best solved on quantum computers.
quantum computers are based on quantum bits, or qubits.
qubits can exist in a state of 1 or 0 like classical bits, but also in superpositions of 1 and 0.
this opens up a huge new range of data attributes because the superposition can be any combination of the range of values of 1 and 0, rather than just 1 or just 0.
this means that an infinite number of states are possible on a qubit.
the potential benefits of quantum computing are staggering.
by exploiting the bizarre properties of quantum mechanics, quantum computers could vastly outperform classical computers in certain types of difficult calculations.
bottom line
a huge amount of work is needed before quantum computing will have any real practical or commercial uses.
innovations are happening, and real business value added via quantum computing is still nonexistent.
but by this time next year, amazon, ibm, microsoft and google will all have quantum cloud computing services available for enterprise customers.
honeywell announced tuesday that it is on track to have a quantum computer with a quantum volume of at least 64 qubits within the next three months.
tony uttley, president of honeywell quantum solutions, said that at any scale quantum computing is a controls problem.
"any quantum computer requires a set of vacuum systems, cooling, and vibration control, and these are things that honeywell has been working on for decades," he said.
quantum volume measures computational ability, indicating the relative complexity of a problem that can be solved by a quantum computer.
when released, honeywell's quantum computer will have twice that of the next alternative in the industry.
"our trajectory is to increase the volume by an order of magnitude every year for the next five years," he said.
when honeywell releases its quantum computer in the next three months, it will have a quantum volume of at least 64, twice that of the next alternative in the industry.
see: cloud providers 2019: a buyer's guide (free pdf)
james sanders, a cloud transformation analyst at 451 research, said that honeywell's announcement shows the variety of ways there are to build quantum computers.
honeywell's quantum computer uses trapped-ion technology, which leverages numerous, individual, charged atoms (ions) to hold quantum information.
honeywell's system applies electromagnetic fields to hold (trap) each ion so it can be manipulated and encoded using laser pulses.
honeywell's trapped-ion qubits can be uniformly generated with errors more well understood compared with alternative qubit technologies that do not directly use atoms.
uttley also said that another element of honeywell's quantum work is the ability to do mid-circuit measures, which is the quantum equivalent of putting an if statement into an algorithm.
"we will be able to pause mid-calculation, interrogate a qubit—it is a one or a zero—and then depending on the answer, you do something different with the rest of the equation," he said.
the key to doing that is long coherence times.
selling quantum as a service
the company also announced it has made strategic investments in two leading quantum computing software providers and signed a partnership to develop quantum computing algorithms with jpmorgan chase.
honeywell's quantum computer will be a full stack cloud computer via api.
uttley said that honeywell will offer access to its quantum computer through microsoft azure.
the company has been developing quantum use cases with aerospace, chemicals, and oil-and-gas applications, including creating new catalysts for use in oil-and-gas processing.
also see
quantum computers should soon be able to beat classical computers at certain basic tasks.
but before they’re truly powerful, researchers have to overcome a number of fundamental roadblocks.
after decades of heavy slog with no promise of success, quantum computing is suddenly buzzing with almost feverish excitement and activity.
nearly two years ago, ibm made a quantum computer available to the world: the 5-quantum-bit (qubit) resource they now call (a little awkwardly) the ibm q experience.
that seemed more like a toy for researchers than a way of getting any serious number crunching done.
but 70,000 users worldwide have registered for it, and the qubit count in this resource has now quadrupled.
in the past few months, ibm and intel have announced that they have made quantum computers with 50 and 49 qubits, respectively, and google is thought to have one waiting in the wings.
“there is a lot of energy in the community, and the recent progress is immense,” said physicist jens eisert of the free university of berlin.
there is now talk of impending “quantum supremacy”: the moment when a quantum computer can carry out a task beyond the means of today’s best classical supercomputers.
that might sound absurd when you compare the bare numbers: 50 qubits versus the billions of classical bits in your laptop.
but the whole point of quantum computing is that a quantum bit counts for much, much more than a classical bit.
fifty qubits has long been considered the approximate number at which quantum computing becomes capable of calculations that would take an unfeasibly long time classically.
midway through 2017, researchers at google announced that they hoped to have demonstrated quantum supremacy by the end of the year.
(when pressed for an update, a spokesperson recently said that “we hope to announce results as soon as we can, but we’re going through all the detailed work to ensure we have a solid result before we announce.”)
it would be tempting to conclude from all this that the basic problems are solved in principle and the path to a future of ubiquitous quantum computing is now just a matter of engineering.
but that would be a mistake.
the fundamental physics of quantum computing is far from solved and can’t be readily disentangled from its implementation.
even if we soon pass the quantum supremacy milestone, the next year or two might be the real crunch time for whether quantum computers will revolutionize computing.
there’s still everything to play for and no guarantee of reaching the big goal.
both the benefits and the challenges of quantum computing are inherent in the physics that permits it.
the basic story has been told many times, though not always with the nuance that quantum mechanics demands.
classical computers encode and manipulate information as strings of binary digits — 1 or 0.
quantum bits do the same, except that they may be placed in a so-called superposition of the states 1 and 0, which means that a measurement of the qubit’s state could elicit the answer 1 or 0 with some well-defined probability.
to perform a computation with many such qubits, they must all be sustained in interdependent superpositions of states — a “quantum-coherent” state, in which the qubits are said to be entangled.
that way, a tweak to one qubit may influence all the others.
this means that somehow computational operations on qubits count for more than they do for classical bits.
the computational resources increase in simple proportion to the number of bits for a classical device, but adding an extra qubit potentially doubles the resources of a quantum computer.
this is why the difference between a 5-qubit and a 50-qubit machine is so significant.
note that i’ve not said — as it often is said — that a quantum computer has an advantage because the availability of superpositions hugely increases the number of states it can encode, relative to classical bits.
nor have i said that entanglement permits many calculations to be carried out in parallel.
(indeed, a strong degree of qubit entanglement isn’t essential.)
there’s an element of truth in those descriptions — some of the time — but none captures the essence of quantum computing.
it’s hard to say qualitatively why quantum computing is so powerful precisely because it is hard to specify what quantum mechanics means at all.
the equations of quantum theory certainly show that it will work: that, at least for some classes of computation such as factorization or database searches, there is tremendous speedup of the calculation.
but how exactly?
perhaps the safest way to describe quantum computing is to say that quantum mechanics somehow creates a “resource” for computation that is unavailable to classical devices.
as quantum theorist daniel gottesman of the perimeter institute in waterloo, canada, put it, “if you have enough quantum mechanics available, in some sense, then you have speedup, and if not, you don’t.”
some things are clear, though.
to carry out a quantum computation, you need to keep all your qubits coherent.
and this is very hard.
interactions of a system of quantum-coherent entities with their surrounding environment create channels through which the coherence rapidly “leaks out” in a process called decoherence.
researchers seeking to build quantum computers must stave off decoherence, which they can currently do only for a fraction of a second.
that challenge gets ever greater as the number of qubits — and hence the potential to interact with the environment — increases.
this is largely why, even though quantum computing was first proposed by richard feynman in 1982 and the theory was worked out in the early 1990s, it has taken until now to make devices that can actually perform a meaningful computation.
quantum errors
there’s a second fundamental reason why quantum computing is so difficult.
like just about every other process in nature, it is noisy.
random fluctuations, from heat in the qubits, say, or from fundamentally quantum-mechanical processes, will occasionally flip or randomize the state of a qubit, potentially derailing a calculation.
this is a hazard in classical computing too, but it’s not hard to deal with — you just keep two or more backup copies of each bit so that a randomly flipped bit stands out as the odd one out.
researchers working on quantum computers have created strategies for how to deal with the noise.
but these strategies impose a huge debt of computational overhead — all your computing power goes to correcting errors and not to running your algorithms.
“current error rates significantly limit the lengths of computations that can be performed,” said andrew childs, the codirector of the joint center for quantum information and computer science at the university of maryland.
“we’ll have to do a lot better if we want to do something interesting.”
a lot of research on the fundamentals of quantum computing has been devoted to error correction.
part of the difficulty stems from another of the key properties of quantum systems: superpositions can only be sustained as long as you don’t measure the qubit’s value.
if you make a measurement, the superposition collapses to a definite value: 1 or 0.
so how can you find out if a qubit has an error if you don’t know what state it is in?
one ingenious scheme involves looking indirectly, by coupling the qubit to another “ancilla” qubit that doesn’t take part in the calculation but that can be probed without collapsing the state of the main qubit itself.
it’s complicated to implement, though.
such solutions mean that, to construct a genuine “logical qubit” on which computation with error correction can be performed, you need many physical qubits.
how many?
quantum theorist alán aspuru-guzik of harvard university estimates that around 10,000 of today’s physical qubits would be needed to make a single logical qubit — a totally impractical number.
if the qubits get much better, he said, this number could come down to a few thousand or even hundreds.
eisert is less pessimistic, saying that on the order of 800 physical qubits might already be enough, but even so he agrees that “the overhead is heavy,” and for the moment we need to find ways of coping with error-prone qubits.
an alternative to correcting errors is avoiding them or canceling out their influence: so-called error mitigation.
researchers at ibm, for example, are developing schemes for figuring out mathematically how much error is likely to have been incurred in a computation and then extrapolating the output of a computation to the “zero noise” limit.
some researchers think that the problem of error correction will prove intractable and will prevent quantum computers from achieving the grand goals predicted for them.
“the task of creating quantum error-correcting codes is harder than the task of demonstrating quantum supremacy,” said mathematician gil kalai of the hebrew university of jerusalem in israel.
and he adds that “devices without error correction are computationally very primitive, and primitive-based supremacy is not possible.” in other words, you’ll never do better than classical computers while you’ve still got errors.
others believe the problem will be cracked eventually.
according to jay gambetta, a quantum information scientist at ibm’s thomas j. watson research center, “our recent experiments at ibm have demonstrated the basic elements of quantum error correction on small devices, paving the way towards larger-scale devices where qubits can reliably store quantum information for a long period of time in the presence of noise.” even so, he admits that “a universal fault-tolerant quantum computer, which has to use logical qubits, is still a long way off.” such developments make childs cautiously optimistic.
“i’m sure we’ll see improved experimental demonstrations of [error correction], but i think it will be quite a while before we see it used for a real computation,” he said.
living with errors
for the time being, quantum computers are going to be error-prone, and the question is how to live with that.
at ibm, researchers are talking about “approximate quantum computing” as the way the field will look in the near term: finding ways of accommodating the noise.
this calls for algorithms that tolerate errors, getting the correct result despite them.
it’s a bit like working out the outcome of an election regardless of a few wrongly counted ballot papers.
“a sufficiently large and high-fidelity quantum computation should have some advantage [over a classical computation] even if it is not fully fault-tolerant,” said gambetta.
one of the most immediate error-tolerant applications seems likely to be of more value to scientists than to the world at large: to simulate stuff at the atomic level.
(this, in fact, was the motivation that led feynman to propose quantum computing in the first place.)
the equations of quantum mechanics prescribe a way to calculate the properties — such as stability and chemical reactivity — of a molecule such as a drug.
but they can’t be solved classically without making lots of simplifications.
in contrast, the quantum behavior of electrons and atoms, said childs, “is relatively close to the native behavior of a quantum computer.” so one could then construct an exact computer model of such a molecule.
“many in the community, including me, believe that quantum chemistry and materials science will be one of the first useful applications of such devices,” said aspuru-guzik, who has been at the forefront of efforts to push quantum computing in this direction.
quantum simulations are proving their worth even on the very small quantum computers available so far.
a team of researchers including aspuru-guzik has developed an algorithm that they call the variational quantum eigensolver (vqe), which can efficiently find the lowest-energy states of molecules even with noisy qubits.
so far it can only handle very small molecules with few electrons, which classical computers can already simulate accurately.
but the capabilities are getting better, as gambetta and coworkers showed last september when they used a 6-qubit device at ibm to calculate the electronic structures of molecules, including lithium hydride and beryllium hydride.
the work was “a significant leap forward for the quantum regime,” according to physical chemist markus reiher of the swiss federal institute of technology in zurich, switzerland.
“the use of the vqe for the simulation of small molecules is a great example of the possibility of near-term heuristic algorithms,” said gambetta.
but even for this application, aspuru-guzik confesses that logical qubits with error correction will probably be needed before quantum computers truly begin to surpass classical devices.
“i would be really excited when error-corrected quantum computing begins to become a reality,” he said.
“if we had more than 200 logical qubits, we could do things in quantum chemistry beyond standard approaches,” reiher adds.
“and if we had about 5,000 such qubits, then the quantum computer would be transformative in this field.”
what’s your volume?
despite the challenges of reaching those goals, the fast growth of quantum computers from 5 to 50 qubits in barely more than a year has raised hopes.
but we shouldn’t get too fixated on these numbers, because they tell only part of the story.
what matters is not just — or even mainly — how many qubits you have, but how good they are, and how efficient your algorithms are.
any quantum computation has to be completed before decoherence kicks in and scrambles the qubits.
typically, the groups of qubits assembled so far have decoherence times of a few microseconds.
the number of logic operations you can carry out during that fleeting moment depends on how quickly the quantum gates can be switched — if this time is too slow, it really doesn’t matter how many qubits you have at your disposal.
the number of gate operations needed for a calculation is called its depth: low-depth (shallow) algorithms are more feasible than high-depth ones, but the question is whether they can be used to perform useful calculations.
what’s more, not all qubits are equally noisy.
in theory it should be possible to make very low-noise qubits from so-called topological electronic states of certain materials, in which the “shape” of the electron states used for encoding binary information confers a kind of protection against random noise.
researchers at microsoft, most prominently, are seeking such topological states in exotic quantum materials, but there’s no guarantee that they’ll be found or will be controllable.
researchers at ibm have suggested that the power of a quantum computation on a given device be expressed as a number called the “quantum volume,” which bundles up all the relevant factors: number and connectivity of qubits, depth of algorithm, and other measures of the gate quality, such as noisiness.
it’s really this quantum volume that characterizes the power of a quantum computation, and gambetta said that the best way forward right now is to develop quantum-computational hardware that increases the available quantum volume.
this is one reason why the much vaunted notion of quantum supremacy is more slippery than it seems.
the image of a 50-qubit (or so) quantum computer outperforming a state-of-the-art supercomputer sounds alluring, but it leaves a lot of questions hanging.
outperforming for which problem?
how do you know the quantum computer has got the right answer if you can’t check it with a tried-and-tested classical device?
and how can you be sure that the classical machine wouldn’t do better if you could find the right algorithm?
so quantum supremacy is a concept to handle with care.
some researchers prefer now to talk about “quantum advantage,” which refers to the speedup that quantum devices offer without making definitive claims about what is best.
an aversion to the word “supremacy” has also arisen because of the racial and political implications.
whatever you choose to call it, a demonstration that quantum computers can do things beyond current classical means would be psychologically significant for the field.
“demonstrating an unambiguous quantum advantage will be an important milestone,” said eisert — it would prove that quantum computers really can extend what is technologically possible.
that might still be more of a symbolic gesture than a transformation in useful computing resources.
but such things may matter, because if quantum computing is going to succeed, it won’t be simply by the likes of ibm and google suddenly offering their classy new machines for sale.
rather, it’ll happen through an interactive and perhaps messy collaboration between developers and users, and the skill set will evolve in the latter only if they have sufficient faith that the effort is worth it.
this is why both ibm and google are keen to make their devices available as soon as they’re ready.
as well as a 16-qubit ibm q experience offered to anyone who registers online, ibm now has a 20-qubit version for corporate clients, including jp morgan chase, daimler, honda, samsung and the university of oxford.
not only will that help clients discover what’s in it for them; it should create a quantum-literate community of programmers who will devise resources and solve problems beyond what any individual company could muster.
“for quantum computing to take traction and blossom, we must enable the world to use and to learn it,” said gambetta.
“this period is for the world of scientists and industry to focus on getting quantum-ready.”
fujitsu laboratories ltd., and quantum benchmark inc. of canada announced that they will conduct joint research on quantum algorithms using quantum benchmark’s error suppression technology as they aim to advance the capabilities of current generation quantum computing platforms.
quantum benchmark, a startup founded by leading researchers from the university of waterloo’s institute for quantum computing, is the leading provider of software solutions for error characterization, error suppression, and performance validation for quantum computing hardware.
in this collaborative research project, the companies will develop practical quantum algorithms utilizing fujitsu’s ai algorithm development technology as well as its knowledge gained through digital annealer(1) applications in finance, medicine and material development.
quantum benchmark’s patented true-qtm software system, which enables optimal performance of current hardware, is a key to this development.
accordingly, fujitsu laboratories and quantum benchmark will endeavor to solve problems in the fields of materials science, drug development and finance that are intractable to solve with conventional computers.
issues and development background
quantum computers are expected to be able to perform a new form of computation by harnessing fundamental properties of the quantum world, such as entanglement and superposition.
this is often explained by invoking the idea that they can process both 0 and 1 at the same time, and the continuum of states in between 0 and 1.
this advantage comes by performing calculations using quantum bits, called “qubits”, which is unlike conventional computers which process conventional bits, that can be only 0 or 1.
however, quantum bits are fragile and highly vulnerable to errors and noise, and as time goes on, the effects of noise add up, making the quantum calculation results inaccurate.
since calculations for pharmaceuticals and materials are time-consuming, there is a need to develop error-suppression methods enabling algorithms to overcome the effects of noise.
outline of the joint research
1.
research period: april 2020 to march 2021 (planned for extension after april 2021)
2.
roles and responsibilities:
fujitsu laboratories ltd.
– development of quantum algorithm for applications such as quantum chemistry and machine learning
– development of performance analysis technology for quantum algorithm in simulations
quantum benchmark inc.
– support implementation of the company’s true-qtm error diagnosis technology on current quantum computing platforms
– support implementation of quantum algorithms on current quantum computing platforms
– support custom specific error suppression strategies and performance evaluation for quantum algorithms on current quantum computing platforms
future plans
fujitsu laboratories and quantum benchmark will expand the scope of their joint research beyond finance, drug discovery, and materials, as they plan to develop quantum algorithms to be implemented in quantum computers for various applications which could not be solved with conventional computers.
the companies aim to demonstrate new applications on a 100+ qubit quantum computer by 2023.
(1) digital annealer fujitsu’s new quantum-inspired architecture that can rapidly resolve combinatorial optimization problems
featured news from related categories:
engineers at caltech have shown that atoms in optical cavities — tiny boxes for light — could lead to the creation of a quantum internet.
their national science foundation-funded work was published in the journal nature physics.
quantum networks would connect quantum computers through a system that operates at a quantum, rather than classical, level.
in theory, quantum computers will one day be able to perform certain functions faster than classical computers by taking advantage of the special properties of quantum mechanics.
nsf-funded researchers are working to create the building blocks of a quantum network.
credit: wikimedia commons
as they can with classical computers, engineers would like to be able to connect multiple quantum computers to share data and work together in a quantum computer network.
“while important in their own right, quantum computer networks also represent an important step toward realizing the goal of a secure quantum internet,” explained fil bartoli, director of nsf’s division of electrical, communications and cyber systems.
networks would open the door to several applications, including solving computations that are too large to be handled by a single quantum computer and establishing unbreakably secure communications using quantum cryptography.
a quantum network needs to be able to transmit information between two points without altering the quantum properties of the information being transmitted.
one current model works like this: a single atom or ion acts as a quantum bit (or “qubit”) storing information via one of its quantum properties, such as spin.
to read that information and transmit it elsewhere, the atom is excited with a pulse of light, causing it to emit a photon whose spin is entangled with the spin of the atom.
the photon can then transmit the information entangled with the atom over a long distance via fiber optic cable.
researchers led by caltech’s andrei faraon, an applied physicist and electrical engineer, constructed a nanophotonic cavity, a beam that is about 10 microns long – a fraction of an inch — with periodic nano-patterning, sculpted from a piece of crystal.
in this cavity, scientists can excite a ytterbium ion and efficiently detect the resulting photon it emits, whose spin can be used to read the information stored in the ion’s spin.
“advances like this fundamental research in quantum information science are important milestones to enable the long-term development of quantum technology,” added alex cronin, a program officer in nsf’s division of physics.
source: nsf
featured news from related categories:
imagine a place where anything possible always happens, like a tv screen that displays all the channels at once.
if that seems beyond imagination, you are not alone.
the world of quantum physics is so weird that even the scientists who study it say it challenges everyday concepts of common sense.
the field has grown from a realization that at the smallest scale — the realm where atoms and molecules roam — the classical equations that isaac newton used to describe the physical world no longer apply.
in this realm, matter behaves differently, and many realities can co-exist.
particles like electrons, for instance, occupy several locations at the same time, behaving more like fuzzy waves than solid pebbles.
fortunately, such weirdness mostly confines itself to the inner life of atoms.
but a new quantum world is coming, where scientists hope to preserve the quirky diversity of the subatomic realm.
this would allow them to devise superfast computers, design new drugs and guarantee security for sending secret messages.
harnessing the power of the quantum realm requires coordinated planning from experts in fields ranging from physics and chemistry to electrical engineering.
and that puts usc college’s daniel lidar in a perfect position to help prepare for the quantum future.
a physicist with joint appointments in the departments of chemistry and electrical engineering, lidar is a leader in current efforts to transform quantum physics from theoretical curiosity to cutting-edge information technology.
as the son of two scientists (a biochemist and pharmacologist), lidar was constantly exposed to scientific thinking while growing up in israel and holland.
he earned his ph.d. in physics from hebrew university in jerusalem in 1997, and soon thereafter began exploring the emerging field of quantum information theory.
after a postdoctoral position at berkeley and several years on the faculty at the university of toronto, he migrated to usc last fall.
he was drawn by southern california’s growing status as the world’s leading region for the new quantum research enterprise.
“this is a real hub,” he said, noting that usc, caltech and uc santa barbara all boast strong programs.
“southern california is probably the world capital of activity in my field.”
in the mid-1990s, bell labs mathematician peter shor initiated the quantum information revolution by proving that a computer using quantum programming could crack the toughest of today’s secret codes, used for governmental, military and financial communication.
about the same time, other research showed that only another quantum system could provide absolute protection against any illicit eavesdropping.
work by lidar and his collaborators has focused on how to protect the delicate process of quantum computing from attack — by nature itself or malicious hackers.
so far, quantum computations have been performed only in rudimentary laboratory experiments.
if feasible on a larger scale, quantum computers could solve some difficult problems at a fraction of the speed of today’s fastest supercomputers.
the trick relies on those multiple quantum realities.
like the tv screen showing every channel at once, a quantum computer could process all the numbers in its memory simultaneously, rather than one computation at a time.
it’s a bit like finding which of a thousand keys opens a lock; instead of trying one at a time, you could just spin one key in the lock until it opened.
certain problems that would tax a supercomputer for a trillion years could yield to a quantum computer in minutes.
but such speed is available only as long as the multiple quantum calculations can be protected from outside interference.
and the same process nature uses to make rocks and people solid, instead of fuzzy like electrons, conspires to keep that time very, very short.
that process, known as quantum decoherence, is usually an immediate and inevitable result of interaction with the environment — collisions with atoms or mere particles of light can cause a frail ensemble of multiple quantum realities to crash.
lidar and colleagues have shown, though, that some quantum computing set-ups are at least partially immune to the ravages of decoherence.
by designing an apparatus with “decoherence free subspaces,” quantum information can be preserved in the face of environmental insults.
the solution is to make sure that external effects exert a symmetric effect on the quantum storage sites.
(if one bit of information is altered, so is its partner, so the two together retain a record of the stored information.)
a more difficult challenge may arise on a future “quantum internet” where quantum computers share data.
nobody had considered the potential for quantum viruses afflicting such a network until last year, when lidar and post-doc lian-ao wu proposed a scheme for fighting such “quantum malware” in a paper to be published in the journal quantum information processing.
“essentially the proposal is to do the analog of backup,” said lidar, an associate professor hired as part of the college’s senior faculty initiative.
only legitimate users of a system would be told when “real” data is being transmitted.
during the remaining down time, the quantum data could be stored on a secure device, off the network, while bogus transmissions serve as a decoy for intruders.
a hacker would never know when the system was vulnerable, and constant intrusion attempts would be easy to detect.
“it’s the first look at this problem,” lidar said, and much further work will be needed to devise foolproof protection and a quantum virus cleanser if infection is successful.
for now, of course, quantum viruses are of no serious concern, as there is no quantum network to attack.
but lidar foresees a growing likelihood that quantum technology will soon play a significant role in sending secure messages and eventually in computing.
“it’s a field that is likely to have a widespread impact in the context of secure information transmission,” he said.
“it is the most secure method of information transmission that we know of.”
as for quantum computing, its advantages are limited to certain types of problems; quantum computers are likely never to be good for word processing.
but they could prove valuable in economically important realms such as designing drugs from scratch, by computing the quantum rules governing how biological molecules interact.
any such uses depend, of course, on effective hardware for building quantum computing devices, which might require advances in nanotechnology approaches for fabricating the necessary materials.
thus while lidar focuses on theory, he emphasizes the need to develop the experimental side of the field as well.
“my dream for usc would be to develop not only as a leading theoretical place, which i believe it is .
.
.
but also to strongly develop the experimental capabilities here,” he said.
“that would really put us on the map.”
source: university of southern california, by tom siegfried
last month, a team of russian and american scientists unveiled a quantum computer array with 51 qubits at the international conference on quantum technologies in moscow.
here's a look at how they accomplished this new milestone with the use of cold atoms and lasers.
what is quantum computing?
if you're already familiar with quantum computing, i recommend skipping to the next section.
if you're not familiar with quantum computing, it is aptly named for its quantum properties.
in quantum physics, particles do not have a defined location until they are observed.
in classical computing, digital data is read in bits, which are 1s and 0s, or on and off states, which we know as binary, which can be manipulated into different arrangements using various logic gates.
quantum computing combines concepts from classical computing and quantum mechanics to make qubits (a shortened nickname for "quantum bits").
unlike classical bits, qubits can be a 1 or 0 at the same time, much like schrodinger's cat, which is in a state of flux until observed.
so, four bits have 16 possible combinations (24), whereas four qubits can be in every possible combination at the same time until they are observed.
this allows a quantum computer to perform every possible calculation at the same time.
a quantum algorithm reduces the time required for large calculations by the square root of the number of entries being searched.
quantum computers are not practical for most tasks handled by personal computers, but they excel at large-scale calculations such as searching databases, running simulations, and even breaking encryptions.
the video below is the simplest explanation of quantum computing i have seen so far.
the 51 qubit quantum computer and cold atom physics
it seems like every few months, quantum computing reaches a new milestone.
last month, at the international conference on quantum technologies in moscow, attendees and reporters gathered in mass for professor john martinis' presentation of a chip embedded with 49 qubits.
instead, in a fashion that reminds me of steve harvey announcing the miss universe pageant, mikhail lukin, a harvard professor and co-founder of the russian quantum center made his own announcement and stole the show.
lukin's team had successfully created the world's most powerful, functional quantum computer to date, which runs on 51 qubits.
the device was tested successfully at harvard, where it solved physics problems that silicon chip-based supercomputers were struggling with.
most quantum computers have been designed using superconductors and even semiconductors.
martinis' 49-qubit chip was constructed in this fashion.
since traditional semiconductor materials are reaching their limits, lukin's team took a different approach.
the 51-qubit machine uses "cold atoms" in place of qubits that are locked onto laser cells.
cold atom physics is the discipline of studying atoms at incredibly low temperatures (.0000001 degrees kelvin) in order to recreate quantum conditions.
cooling atoms to temperatures near absolute zero slows their movement down and makes them easier to observe.
the video below gives an introduction to cold atom physics (starting at 1:35).
after that, we'll get into the biggest question i had about all of this:
how the heck do super-cooled atoms with lasers shining through them make a computer?
how do cold atoms make a functional computer?
lukin's team wrote a research paper (pdf) explaining the experiment they set up.
after sifting through the equations, i arrived at the data-reading mechanism.
the setup consists of a linear array101 evenly spaced "optical tweezers", which are generated by feeding a multi-tone rf signal into an into an acousto-optic deflector.
in simpler terms, they shine a laser beam through a vacuum tube and take fluorescence images (a type of laser scanning microscopy) of the atoms as they change between positions.
the "traps" that control the position of the atoms are programmable, which allows this super cooled vacuum tube with a laser shooting through it to function like a quantum computer.
as computing devices become ever smaller, engineers have been teaming up with scientists from other disciplines like physics and biology to make some outside-the box computing devices.
although it's unlikely that any of these will end up in personal devices anytime soon (or ever), it always reminds me that a computer is just a device that calculates problems, and what our concept of a "computer" will look like in 100 years might just be beyond our current levels of comprehension.
if you'd like to learn more about quantum computing, i've compiled some resources below along with some of my favorite outlandish non-silicon computers!
quantum computing resources
some "out there" computers and logic-based devices
featured image used courtesy of kurzgesagt
an international team of researchers led by the university of bristol have demonstrated that light can be used to implement a multi-functional quantum processor.
this small device can be used as a scientific tool to perform a wide array of quantum information experiments, while at the same time showing the way to how fully functional quantum computers might be engineered from large scale fabrication processes.
they did this by engineering a silicon chip that guides single particles of light, called photons in optical tracks called waveguides to encode so-called quantum-bits of information called "qubits".
international effort is growing to develop quantum computers as the next step in computing power, to increase the types of tasks that computers can solve for us.
in today's desktop computers, super-computers and smartphones, bits take the form of either being a "1" or a "0" and they are the fundamental building block on which all computers currently used in society are based.
quantum computers are instead based on "qubits" that can be in a superposition of the 0 and 1 states.
multiple qubits can also be linked in a special way called quantum entanglement.
these two quantum physical properties provide the power to quantum computers.
one challenge is to make quantum computer processors that can be re-programmed to perform different tasks, just as we have computers today that can be re-programmed to run different applications.
a second challenge is how to make a quantum computer in a way that its many parts can be made with very high quality and ultimately at low cost.
the bristol team has been using silicon photonic chips as a way to try to build quantum computing components on a large scale and today's result, published in the journal nature photonics, demonstrates it is possible to fully control two qubits of information within a single integrated chip.
this means any task that can be achieved with two qubits, can be programmed and realised with the device.
lead author, dr. xiaogang qiang, who undertook the work whilst studying for a ph.d. at the university of bristol, and now works in the national university of defence technology in china, said: "what we've demonstrated is a programmable machine that can do lots of different tasks.
"it's a very primitive processor, because it only works on two qubits, which means there is still a long way before we can do useful computations with this technology.
"but what is exciting is that it the different properties of silicon photonics that can be used for making a quantum computer have been combined together in one device.
"this is just too complicated to physically implement with light using previous approaches."
the integrated photonics effort started in 2008 and was an answer to the growing concern that individual mirrors and optical elements are just too big and unstable to realise the large complex circuits that a quantum computer will be built.
dr. jonathan matthews, a member of the research team based at the quantum engineering technology (qet) labs at the university of bristol, added: "we need to be looking at how to make quantum computers out of technology that is scalable, which includes technology that we know can be built incredibly precisely on a tremendous scale.
"we think silicon is a promising material to do this, partly because of all the investment that has already gone into developing silicon for the micro-electronics and photonics industries.
and the types of devices developed in bristol, such as the one presented today, are showing just how well quantum devices can be engineered.
"a consequence of the growing sophistication and functionality of these devices is that they are becoming a research tool in their own right—we've used this device to implement several different quantum information experiments using nearly 100,000 different re-programmed settings."
the study is published in nature photonics.
provided by university of bristol
milestone on the path to the quantum computer: scientists of the university of konstanz, princeton university, and the university of maryland have developed a stable quantum gate for two-quantum bit systems made of silicon.
the quantum gate is able to perform all necessary basic operations of the quantum computer.
the electron spin of individual electrons in silicon is used as the basic storage unit ("quantum bits").
the research results were published ahead of print in science on 7 december 2017.
it will take quite a few years until the production of commercial quantum computers.
quantum computers will be more efficient and will be able to solve problems impossible for current computers.
however, the quantum computer reacts much more sensitively to external disturbances than a conventional machine.
consequently, a primary goal is to create stable "quantum gates"—the basic "building block" of the quantum computer.
scientists from the university of konstanz, princeton university and the university of maryland now succeeded in creating stable quantum gates for two-quantum bit systems.
their quantum gate uses individual electrons in silicon to store the quantum bits, and they can precisely control and read out the interaction of two quantum bits.
this way, the experiment includes all necessary basic operations of the quantum computer.
from electron to quantum bit
just as a classical digital computer uses bits with the values of either zero or one as the basic units for all calculation processes, a quantum computer, uses quantum bits.
the difference is that the quantum bit is not limited to two states (zero and one), but can exist in multiple states at once, and is therefore much more complex in its implementation than a simple digital system.
researchers have come up with several ideas for technically realizing a quantum bit, for example, using ions or superconducting systems.
the researchers from konstanz, princeton and maryland, however, use the electron spin, the intrinsic angular momentum of a single electron, as the basis of quantum bits.
the electron's direction of rotation corresponds to the zero and one values of the digital bit, but in its exact quantum state, the electron is able to hold more information than just a simple zero or one.
a first achievement of the researchers was therefore to extract a single electron from the billions of atoms of a silicon piece.
"that was an extraordinary achievement by our colleagues from princeton," says physicist professor guido burkard, who coordinated the theoretical research in konstanz.
the researchers used a combination of electromagnetic attraction and repulsion to separate a single electron from the electron bunch.
the separated electrons are then lined up precisely and each is embedded in a kind of "hollow," where they are held in a floating state.
the next challenge was to develop a system to control the angular momentum of individual electrons.
konstanz physicists guido burkard and maximilian russ have developed the following method: a nano-electrode is applied to each electron.
using a magnetic field gradient, the physicists can create a position-dependent magnetic field with which to access the individual electrons, thereby enabling the researchers to control the angular momentum of the electrons.
this way, they have created stable one-quantum-bit systems to store and read out information in the form of electron spins.
the step towards the two-quantum bit system
one quantum bit, however, is not enough to generate the basic switching system of a quantum computer.
to do so, two quantum bits are required.
the crucial step the konstanz researchers took towards the two-quantum bit system was to link the states of two electrons.
such a link makes it possible to construct basal switching systems with which all basic operations of the quantum computer can be performed.
for example, the system can be programmed in such a way that an electron rotates only when its adjacent electron has a spin in a predetermined direction.
this meant that the researchers from konstanz had to create a stable system to link the spins of two individual electrons.
"that was the most important and difficult part of our work," says guido burkard, who designed and planned the method together with team member maximilian russ.
they developed a switching system that coordinates the angular momentum of two electrons in inter-dependence.
an additional nano-electrode is placed between the two "hollows" in which the silicon electrons are floating.
this electrode controls the coupling between the two electron spins.
with this method, the physicists have realized a stable and functional basic processing unit of a quantum computer.
fidelities for single quantum bits are above 99 percent, and about 80 percent for two interacting quantum bits—significantly more stable and more accurate than in previous attempts.
silicon—a "silent material"
the base material of the quantum gate is silicon.
"a magnetically very silent material with only a low number of own nuclear spins," guido burkard says, summarizing the advantages of silicon.
it is important that the atomic nuclei of the chosen material do not have too many spins, that is, intrinsic angular momentum, which could interfere with the quantum bits.
silicon, with around five percent, has an extremely low spin activity of its atomic nuclei and is therefore a particularly suitable material.
another advantage: silicon is the standard material of semiconductor technology and accordingly well researched.
the scientists can therefore benefit from many years of experience with the material.
provided by university of konstanz
ibm has created a 17-qubit quantum computer and is making plans to timeshare the machine with other companies via cloud computing.
while this is an important step, it isn't quite enough to make quantum computers truly competitive compared to supercomputers.
what will it take to bring quantum computing into the commercial realm—and how long until we get there?
classical computing has been around for many years and has completely transformed the human race.
near instant communication between any two individuals used to be a dream.
the idea of large calculations being done faster than you can blink was unimaginable.
the concept of free information and education was too much for any university to handle.
but it comes as no surprise that, now that these concepts are a reality, we've become dependent on them.
this dependence places pressure on the industry to produce more powerful devices with every passing year.
this was not an issue in the past since silicon devices were easy to scale down.
but, with transistor gates as small as one-atom thick, shrinking may no longer be possible.
silicon, the building block of modern semiconductors, is already being phased out by intel and future devices using feature sizes of 7nm and smaller will instead be made from materials such as indium-gallium-arsenide (ingaas).
increases in computational power may no longer come from feature size reduction.
image courtesy of richard wheeler [cc by-sa 3.0]
one solution for increasing computational power is the use of quantum computers (though their creation isn't likely to allow faster consumer devices).
a common application is reliant on control flow, discrete mathematics, and io handling.
a quantum computer, however, is designed to solve statistical problems and scenarios which involve large amounts of data.
the best way to understand it is to compare a classical processor (such as an i7) to an imaginary quantum processor (iq7 for example).
the i7 could add 1000 numbers together much faster than the q7, but the q7 could solve a game (such as checkers) much faster than the i7 due to the possible number of moves that the game possesses.
so why are quantum computers so good at parallel data crunching?
a classical computer is made up of transistors which handle two possible states: on (1) and off (0).
for each additional bit, the amount of information that can be represented is equal to 2n where n is the number of bits.
for example, four bits can represent one of 16 possible states and eight bits can represent one of 256 possible states.
by comparison, a quantum bit—or qubit—can hold three states: on (1), off (0), and a superposition state.
while the on and off states behave in an identical manner to classical bits, the superposition is what drives quantum computation.
this superposition is a linear probability that lies between 0 and 1, allowing four qubits to represent all 16 different states at the same time where each one of those 16 states has a complex amplitude reflecting its probability of being observed.
read more
ibm's 17-qubit computer
so it's pretty obvious that quantum computing provides many advantages over classical computers for complex, parallel data processing.
while such tasks are not commonly found in the everyday device, they are almost too common in many different industries, including financial data processing, insurance, scientific models, oil reserves, and research.
currently, supercomputers are used for such parallel data processing but, if a quantum option were available, it's a safe bet that each of these sectors would do anything to get one.
this has been one of the major drives in quantum computer technology with many companies trying to produce such a machine.
for example, d-wave systems have their series of specialized quantum annealing processors, while many other researchers and companies are trying to find methods of producing universal quantum gates.
ibm's q quantum computer.
image courtesy of ibm
however, ibm has just taken the lead with their 17-qubit quantum computer.
what makes the ibm quantum computer a game changer is that it is a universal quantum computer as opposed to being a highly specialized device.
many other quantum systems currently available are usually of the annealing persuasion, which is good for optimization problems but not for other quantum problems such as database searches.
the ibm machine, however, can be configured to execute just about any quantum problem.
ibm has decided to sell time on the computers to business and researchers alike through their ibm q program accessed via the internet (i.e., over the cloud).
this will allow developers and researchers to create a quantum program anywhere around the world and then have it executed with the press of a button.
50 is the magic number
ibm's made strides with its previous 5-qubit quantum computer.
this 17-qubit machine is obviously yet another milestone.
however, many say that even a 17-qubit computer is not “good enough” because classical computers can still process the same information in a smaller time frame.
in fact, it has been stated that classical computers can model quantum computers up to 50 qubits in size.
this means that, for a quantum computer to become “better” at solving quantum related problems than a classical computer, it has to contain at least 50 qubits.
of course, this assumes that such quantum computer simulations on classical computers do not improve.
so google is ambitiously planning to release a 49-qubit quantum computer by the end of this year.
considering the size difference between the ibm machine and the proposed google machine, however, it's likely safe to assume that googles machine may not be entirely universal.
phys.org
an attainable future
it's safe to say that quantum computers, despite becoming increasingly more powerful, are still very far away from being commercially available.
ibm's cloud-based scheme, however, does technically place quantum computing into the commercial realm.
supercomputers are still very powerful compared to quantum computers and their cost-to-performance ratio makes them highly economical.
but, unlike fusion power (which is always 20 years away), quantum computers really could make their debut when either ibm or google release the world's first 50-qubit computer.
research teams all over the world are exploring different ways to design a working computing chip that can integrate quantum interactions.
now, unsw engineers believe they have cracked the problem, reimagining the silicon microprocessors we know to create a complete design for a quantum computer chip that can be manufactured using mostly standard industry processes and components.
the new chip design, published in the journal nature communications, details a novel architecture that allows quantum calculations to be performed using existing semiconductor components, known as cmos (complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor) – the basis for all modern chips.
it was devised by andrew dzurak, director of the australian national fabrication facility at the university of new south wales (unsw), and dr menno veldhorst, lead author of the paper who was a research fellow at unsw when the conceptual work was done.
“we often think of landing on the moon as humanity’s greatest technological marvel,” said dzurak, who is also a program leader at australia’s famed centre of excellence for quantum computation and communication technology (cqc2t).
“but creating a microprocessor chip with a billion operating devices integrated together to work like a symphony – that you can carry in your pocket!
– is an astounding technical achievement, and one that’s revolutionised modern life.
“with quantum computing, we are on the verge of another technological leap that could be as deep and transformative.
but a complete engineering design to realise this on a single chip has been elusive.
i think what we have developed at unsw now makes that possible.
and most importantly, it can be made in a modern semiconductor manufacturing plant,” he added.
veldhorst, now a team leader in quantum technology at qutech – a collaboration between delft university of technology and tno, the netherlands organisation for applied scientific research – said the power of the new design is that, for the first time, it charts a conceivable engineering pathway toward creating millions of quantum bits, or qubits.
“remarkable as they are, today’s computer chips cannot harness the quantum effects needed to solve the really important problems that quantum computers will.
to solve problems that address major global challenges – like climate change or complex diseases like cancer – it’s generally accepted we will need millions of qubits working in tandem.
to do that, we will need to pack qubits together and integrate them, like we do with modern microprocessor chips.
that’s what this new design aims to achieve.
“our design incorporates conventional silicon transistor switches to ‘turn on’ operations between qubits in a vast two-dimensional array, using a grid-based ‘word’ and ‘bit’ select protocol similar to that used to select bits in a conventional computer memory chip,” he added.
“by selecting electrodes above a qubit, we can control a qubit’s spin, which stores the quantum binary code of a 0 or 1.
and by selecting electrodes between the qubits, two-qubit logic interactions, or calculations, can be performed between qubits.”
a quantum computer exponentially expands the vocabulary of binary code used in modern computers by using two spooky principles of quantum physics – namely, ‘entanglement’ and ‘superposition’.
qubits can store a 0, a 1, or an arbitrary combination of 0 and 1 at the same time.
and just as a quantum computer can store multiple values at once, so it can process them simultaneously, doing multiple operations at once.
this would allow a universal quantum computer to be millions of times faster than any conventional computer when solving a range of important problems.
but to solve complex problems, a useful universal quantum computer will need a large number of qubits, possibly millions, because all types of qubits we know are fragile, and even tiny errors can be quickly amplified into wrong answers.
“so we need to use error-correcting codes which employ multiple qubits to store a single piece of data,” said dzurak.
“our chip blueprint incorporates a new type of error-correcting code designed specifically for spin qubits, and involves a sophisticated protocol of operations across the millions of qubits.
it’s the first attempt to integrate into a single chip all of the conventional silicon circuitry needed to control and read the millions of qubits needed for quantum computing.”
“we expect that there will still be modifications required to this design as we move towards manufacture, but all of the key components that are needed for quantum computing are here in one chip.
and that’s what will be needed if we are to make quantum computers a workhorse for calculations that are well beyond today’s computers,” dzurak added.
“it shows how to integrate the millions of qubits needed to realise the true promise of quantum computing.”
building such a universal quantum computer has been called the ‘space race of the 21st century’.
for a range of calculations, they will be much faster than existing computers, and for some challenging problems they could find solutions in days, maybe even hours, when today’s best supercomputers would take millions of years.
there are at least five major quantum computing approaches being explored worldwide: silicon spin qubits, ion traps, superconducting loops, diamond vacancies and topological qubits; unsw’s design is based on silicon spin qubits.
the main problem with all of these approaches is that there is no clear pathway to scaling the number of quantum bits up to the millions needed without the computer becoming huge a system requiring bulky supporting equipment and costly infrastructure.
that’s why unsw’s new design is so exciting: relying on its silicon spin qubit approach – which already mimics much of the solid-state devices in silicon that are the heart of the us$380 billion global semiconductor industry – it shows how to dovetail spin qubit error correcting code into existing chip designs, enabling true universal quantum computation.
unlike almost every other major group elsewhere, cqc2t’s quantum computing effort is obsessively focused on creating solid-state devices in silicon, from which all of the world’s computer chips are made.
and they’re not just creating ornate designs to show off how many qubits can be packed together, but aiming to build qubits that could one day be easily fabricated – and scaled up.
“it’s kind of swept under the carpet a bit, but for large-scale quantum computing, we are going to need millions of qubits,” said dzurak.
“here, we show a way that spin qubits can be scaled up massively.
and that’s the key.”
the design is a leap forward in silicon spin qubits; it was only two years ago, in a paper in nature, that dzurak and veldhorst showed, for the first time, how quantum logic calculations could be done in a real silicon device, with the creation of a two-qubit logic gate – the central building block of a quantum computer.
“those were the first baby steps, the first demonstrations of how to turn this radical quantum computing concept into a practical device using components that underpin all modern computing,” said mark hoffman, unsw’s dean of engineering.
“our team now has a blueprint for scaling that up dramatically.
“we’ve been testing elements of this design in the lab, with very positive results.
we just need to keep building on that – which is still a hell of a challenge, but the groundwork is there, and it’s very encouraging.
it will still take great engineering to bring quantum computing to commercial reality, but clearly the work we see from this extraordinary team at cqc2t puts australia in the driver’s seat,” he added.
other cqc2t researchers involved in the design published in the nature communications paper were henry yang and gertjan eenink, the latter of whom has since joined veldhorst at qutech.
the unsw team has struck a a$83 million deal between unsw, telstra, commonwealth bank and the australian and new south wales governments to develop, by 2022, a 10-qubit prototype silicon quantum integrated circuit – the first step in building the world’s first quantum computer in silicon.
in august, the partners launched silicon quantum computing pty ltd, australia’s first quantum computing company, to advance the development and commercialisation of the team’s unique technologies.
the nsw government pledged a$8.7 million, unsw a$25 million, the commonwealth bank a$14 million, telstra a$10 million and the australian government a$25 million.
at room temperature, carbon-13 nuclei in diamond create stable, controllable quantum register
surmounting several distinct hurdles to quantum computing, physicists at harvard university have found that individual carbon-13 atoms in a diamond lattice can be manipulated with extraordinary precision to create stable quantum mechanical memory and a small quantum processor, also known as a quantum register, operating at room temperature.
the finding brings the futuristic technology of quantum information systems into the realm of solid-state materials under ordinary conditions.
the results, described this week in science, could revolutionize scientists' approach to quantum computing, which is built on the profound eccentricity of quantum mechanics and could someday far outperform conventional supercomputers in solving certain problems.
"these experiments lay the groundwork for development of a new approach to quantum information systems," says mikhail d. lukin, professor of physics in harvard's faculty of arts and sciences.
earlier advances in quantum computing have occurred inside high vacuums cooled to fractions of a degree above absolute zero.
individual quantum bits, or qubits -- the building blocks of a quantum computer, encoding information much as a conventional computer bit stores information as zeroes and ones -- are extremely fragile.
usually they decay very rapidly, losing quantum information within a tiny fraction of a second unless the qubit is suspended in high vacuum under these specialized, extreme conditions.
this short "coherence time" has been a major impediment to advances in quantum computing.
quantum mechanics dictates that coherence is destroyed -- and quantum information lost -- through contact with virtually anything, which is why previous attempts at quantum computing have occurred under such extreme circumstances.
this need for absolute isolation has vexed scientists for more than a decade, not only because it is difficult to achieve experimentally -- not to mention in a practical computer -- but because it has complicated the ability to manipulate a quantum computer's input or read its output.
the new advance makes use of spinning properties of atomic nuclei, fundamental building blocks of matter with sub-nanometer dimensions, to encode quantum bits.
acting as tiny magnets, such nuclear spins are well known for their exceptional stability.
but in practice the very weak interactions of nuclear spins with their surroundings -- the very reason for their near-perfect isolation -- means that it is essentially impossible to address and manipulate individual nuclei, and harder still to control interactions between them.
for instance, many billions of nuclei are required in conventional mri machines, which work by detecting signals from spinning nuclei.
"the problem is, what makes single nuclear spin so stable -- its weak interaction with its surroundings -- also prevents us from directly manipulating it," lukin says.
"how do you control something that can't interact with anything""
you do it gingerly and indirectly, the harvard physicists report in science.
they found that nuclear spins associated with single atoms of carbon-13 -- which make up some 1.1 percent of natural diamond -- can be manipulated via a nearby single electron whose own spin can be controlled with optical and microwave radiation.
the excitation of an electron by focusing laser light on a nitrogen vacancy center, a stable defect in a diamond lattice where nitrogen replaces an atom of carbon and develops an electronic spin in its ground state, causes the single electron's spin to act as a very sensitive magnetic probe with extraordinary spatial resolution.
using the nitrogen center as an intermediary, a single carbon-13 atom's nuclear spin is cooled to near absolute zero, creating in the process a single, isolated quantum bit with a coherence time that approaches seconds.
the controlled interaction between the electron and nuclear spins allows the latter to be used as very robust quantum memory.
the harvard physicists also observed and manipulated coupling between individual nuclear spins, thus demonstrating a way to increase the number of qubits working in the quantum register.
because the electron spin and nuclear spin are controlled independently, the experiments lay the groundwork for development of larger, scalable systems in which such quantum registers are connected via optical photons.
"beyond specific applications in quantum information science," the authors write, "our measurements show that the electron spin can be used as a sensitive local magnetic probe that allows for a remarkable degree of control over individual nuclear spins."
source: harvard university
a team of scientists, led by professor winfried hensinger at the university of sussex, has made a major breakthrough concerning one of the biggest problems facing quantum computing: how to reduce the disruptive effects of environmental "noise" on the highly sensitive function of a large-scale quantum computer.
in the real-world, technological developments need to operate in imperfect conditions; what can be successfully tested in a highly controlled laboratory may fail when presented with realistic environmental factors, such as the fluctuations in voltage from an electronic component or stray electromagnetic fields emitted by everyday electronic equipment.
the university of sussex's ion quantum technology group have managed to dramatically reduce the effects of such environmental "noise" affecting trapped ion quantum computers, reporting their findings in an article that has today, thursday 1 november 2018, been published in the journal physical review letters.
it means the team is one step closer to building a large-scale quantum computer with the capability to solve challenging real-world problems.
small-scale quantum computers currently in existence only contain a handful of quantum bits -- components of quantum computers that store information and can exist in multiple states, also referred to as qubits.
as such, current quantum computers are small enough to be operated in a highly controlled environment inside a specialized laboratory.
however, such machines do not have the processing power required to solve complex problems because of the limited number of qubits.
when built, large-scale quantum computers will be able to solve certain problems that would take even the fastest super computers billions of years to calculate.
in order to create a quantum computer that can solve such problems, scientists will need to increase the number of qubits, which in turn will increase the size of the quantum computer.
the problem is that the more qubits that are added, the more difficult it becomes to isolate the computer from any realistic "noise" that would disrupt the computing processes.
hensinger's team of university of sussex physicists have made a quantum computing breakthrough that is capable of mitigating some of these problems.
they collaborated with theoretical scientist dr florian mintert and colleagues from imperial college london, who proposed a theory of how one might be able to solve this problem by manipulating the strange quantum effects in use inside a quantum computer.
the theory allows -- making use of the strange properties of quantum physics -- the execution of quantum computations in such a way that changes in the initial operational parameters of the machine do not lead to a substantial change in the end result of the computation.
this in turn helps to insulate the quantum computer from the effects of environmental 'noise'.
dr sebastian weidt, senior scientist in the sussex ion quantum technology group, explains the significance: "realising this technique may have a profound impact on the ability to develop commercial ion trap quantum computers beyond use in an academic laboratory."
the sussex team went to work to see whether they could actually implement this theory.
they used complicated radio-frequency and microwave signals capable of manipulating the quantum effects inherent in individual charged atoms (ions), to demonstrate this in practical experiments.
their implementation is based on microwave technology, such as that present in mobile phones.
following months of intensive work in the laboratory, the sussex scientists have managed to make this new method a reality, experimentally demonstrating its capabilities to substantially reduce the effect of "noise" on a trapped ion quantum computer.
prof hensinger, head of the ion quantum technology group at the university of sussex -- which last year unveiled the first blueprint for a large-scale quantum computer -- says: "with this advance we have made another practical step towards constructing quantum computers that can host millions of qubits.
such machines are capable of solving certain problems that even the fastest supercomputer may take billions of years to calculate and be of great benefit to humanity; they may be able to help us create new pharmaceuticals; find new cures for diseases, such as dementia; create powerful tools for the financial sector; be of benefit to agriculture, through more efficient fertilizer production, among many other applications.
we are only starting to understand the tremendous potential of these machines."
hensinger's group is now utilising this new technique as they put the final touches to a powerful quantum computer prototype that is currently in their laboratory at the university of sussex.
hensinger says: "it's now time to translate academic achievements into the construction of practical machines.
we're in a fantastic position to do this at sussex and my team is working round the clock to make large-scale quantum computing a future reality."
here is a video of winfried hensinger explaining the research: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c5fnbv7dtxe
hidden beneath our everyday world — on the infinitesimal scale of atomic and subatomic particles — is a strange and elusive realm.
it is a lewis carroll-like place where ghostly particles pop in and out of existence, swirling electrons occupy two positions at once, and objects possess dual natures — they can be both waves and particles simultaneously.
despite the seeming irrationality of these concepts, scientists over the last 120 years have demonstrated that this realm — known as quantum mechanics — is the foundation on which our physical existence is built.
it is one of the most successful theories in modern science.
without it, we would not have such marvels as atomic clocks, computers, lasers, leds, global positioning systems and magnetic resonance imaging, among many other innovations.
it is in the domain of information technology, however, that we might end up owing quantum mechanics our greatest debt.
researchers hope to use quantum principles to create an ultra-powerful computer that would solve problems that conventional computers cannot — from improving cybersecurity and modeling chemical reactions to formulating new drugs and making supply chains more efficient.
this goal could revolutionize certain aspects of computing and open up a new world of technological possibilities.
thanks to advances at universities and industry research centers, a handful of companies have now rolled out prototype quantum computers, but the field is still wide open on fundamental questions about the hardware, software and connections necessary for quantum technologies to fulfill their potential.
researchers at princeton are working to chart the future of quantum computing through foundational research in their labs and through collaborations with industry partners.
“what’s exciting about princeton is that we have real expertise in both the fundamental science and the engineering,” said andrew houck, professor of electrical engineering.
“we have world leaders at every layer of this research.”
the fundamental component of this new technology is the qubit, a quantum version of the classical bit that everyday computers use to represent information.
a classical bit has a value of either 0 or 1, and joining these bits into strings enables computers to represent information such as letters and numbers.
quantum bits, by contrast, can have a value of 0 or 1 at the same time.
this bizarre quality stems from a quantum concept called superposition, in which an object can exist in two or more states at once.
the concept, were it to be applied to everyday life, would result in the paradox known as schrödinger’s cat, in which a fictional cat is simultaneously alive and dead.
quantum computers take advantage of the ability for qubits to exist in different states at the same time.
this means that quantum computers can consider a lot more information at once, evaluating many outcomes simultaneously, thereby increasing their calculating power exponentially.
read a primer on the vocabulary of qubits and related terminology.
introducing the princeton quantum initiative
in september 2019, the university announced the creation of the princeton quantum initiative to foster exploration and education across the spectrum from fundamental quantum research to applications in areas such as computing, sensors and communications.
the initiative comes at a time of national momentum for quantum sciences.
in 2018, the federal government established the national quantum initiative to energize research and training in quantum information science and technology.
the princeton initiative will offer fellowships for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, and research and educational opportunities for undergraduates.
over 30 faculty members, drawn from the departments of electrical engineering, physics, chemistry, computer science, and mechanical and aerospace engineering, will participate in the new program.
the initiative will enable new research collaborations across campus and with other universities and industry.
the initiative’s inaugural director is andrew houck, professor of electrical engineering.
“we have an incredible collection of experts in their respective disciplines,” houck said, “and the princeton quantum initiative gives us an entity that brings everyone together to accelerate the pace of discovery.”
the quest for qubits
over the last three decades, quantum researchers have come up with a handful of ways to make qubits.
the heart of a qubit is typically a very small particle — such as an atom, ion or electron — that due to its tiny size exhibits quantum properties.
one of these is the superconducting qubit or transmon, which is already in use in some early-stage commercial quantum computer prototypes from ibm and google.
a transmon is a sort of artificial atom built from materials such as niobium and aluminum that, at low temperatures, can carry electrical current without resistance.
these materials are patterned to form a small electrical circuit that behaves like an atom.
the state of the qubit, the quantum 0 or 1, is represented by the amount of energy stored in the artificial atom.
maintaining this quantum state long enough to be useful, however, is one of the major challenges for the transmon and other types of qubits.
environmental influences such as vibrations, heat or light can disrupt quantum properties.
this “decoherence” can make it difficult to maintain a particle in a quantum state for even a brief length of time.
“quantum states are incredibly fragile,” houck said.
“real progress is keeping these quantum mechanical properties ‘alive’ for as long as possible so that you can do the kinds of computations, sensing or communications that you want to do before all this falls apart.”
to address this challenge, houck and his team are collaborating with ibm research to fortify the transmon by building more complex circuits that guard against decoherence.
this will allow the transmon to hold a quantum state for several hundred microseconds, which is long enough to carry out many computing steps and represents a huge leap from previous qubit technology.
another strategy for making qubits involves real atoms.
jeffrey thompson, assistant professor of electrical engineering, cools atoms down to incredibly low temperatures and traps them in a vacuum chamber.
once isolated, the researchers can manipulate an individual atom with tightly focused laser beams called optical tweezers.
the researchers can then use additional laser signals to set the trapped atom’s energy levels to represent quantum 0 or 1 states.
“atoms make very good qubits,” thompson said.
“they are actually easy to work with, and it’s very easy to see a single atom using laser light.”
still another type of qubit relies on electrons, or more specifically, an inherent quantum property of electrons known as spin.
spin describes the electron’s angular momentum and is sometimes likened to the twirling movement of a top, but it is also analogous to magnetism because, like a magnet, an electron’s spin can point either downward or upward, representing the values of 0 and 1.
stephen lyon, professor of electrical engineering, is one of the researchers exploring ways to keep spin qubits in superposition for relatively long periods.
his team sends microwave pulses through a highly purified type of silicon, called silicon-28, to coordinate the spins of millions of electrons.
the researchers have shown that they can keep spin qubits in superposition for up to 10 seconds, a lengthy duration in the quantum realm.
for quantum computing to achieve its full potential, qubits will not only need to keep their quantum states, but they will also need to share information with each other.
they do this via a quantum property called entanglement.
like superposition, entanglement is a baffling — but fundamental — quantum concept.
it describes how two particles can act in concert.
after two or more quantum particles interact, they can retain their connection or interdependence.
if one qubit acts in a certain way, its entangled twin will act in the same way, no matter the distance that divides them.
they can be millions of miles away but still act in perfect unison.
this counterintuitive notion, which has survived numerous challenges since its discovery in the 1930s, led albert einstein to label entanglement as “spooky action at a distance.”
by entangling qubits, researchers can build quantum circuits that can do complex calculations.
jason petta, the eugene higgins professor of physics, is working on this challenge for silicon-based spin qubits.
single spins can have a lifetime of up to one minute.
silicon spin qubits could prove less expensive and easier to manufacture than other types of qubits, and although they are not as far along in development as transmons, they are quickly catching up due to recent advances.
petta’s team is devising ways to transfer the information coded in the electron’s spin from one qubit to another — getting electrons to, as he calls it, “talk to each other.” they build qubits by confining electrons in tiny silicon chambers called quantum dots.
the researchers can then apply a strong magnetic field to the dots to coax them to transfer their quantum information to particles of light, or photons, which act as messengers to carry the information to other quantum dots located nearby.
this strategy has already been used to entangle superconducting qubits, and the petta group showed that this approach also works for spin-based qubits.
“it’s like putting an electron and a photon in the same room,” petta said.
“you can transfer some of the spin properties to the photon, which is flying around the room, and then use the photon to transmit information to another spin on the opposite side of the room.”
the variety of ways of producing qubits underscores the state of quantum computing today.
one of the more long-term strategies is to make qubits from majorana fermions, which are particle-like objects that form under specific conditions.
predicted nearly a century ago, these quasi-particles were recently observed in experiments led by ali yazdani, the class of 1909 professor of physics.
the properties of these quasi-particles stem from a branch of mathematics called topology, which describes how objects can be bent or stretched without losing their inherent properties.
this property could give these topological qubits better protection from decoherence.
which qubit will ultimately form the basis of a future quantum computing industry?
this is a quickly developing field with everyone hesitant to predict which qubit will prove the best, according to lyon.
“there are all these different technologies,” he said, “and the simple matter is we don’t know which one is going to work best.”
the quantum internet
creating well-functioning qubits is only one aspect of quantum computing.
an equally important goal is the creation of a quantum information network — a quantum internet — that will be more secure than today’s internet.
nathalie de leon, assistant professor of electrical engineering, is testing the viability of synthetic diamonds as devices that store and transmit information from one place to the next.
although a diamond may look clear and flawless, a close examination reveals something very different.
“if you take a diamond and pull it out of the ground and look at it, you’ll notice all these little defects,” de leon said.
these defects give diamonds their color, but it turns out that they also can store and transmit information.
de leon and her colleagues figured out that by replacing two carbon atoms with a silicon atom, this particular flaw in diamonds can act as a perfect receptacle to catch a photon.
photons already carry information via the optical fibers of today’s internet, and they can also be used to carry quantum information.
de leon and her team are working to transmit quantum information from photons to electron spins, where further fine-tuning can prolong the quantum state by keeping electron spins in the proper orientation.
quantum entanglement ensures that this new kind of internet is secure against hackers.
any attempt to eavesdrop on the transmission will perturb its state.
by comparing the transmitted photon to its entangled twin, the receiver can tell if an eavesdropper has disrupted the transmission.
“as long as the laws of physics are correct, our channel is secure,” de leon said.
quantum architecture
a handful of quantum computers are now in operation, and a few are available for experimentation through the cloud, but they are still working in progress.
for one thing, these computers have qubits in the hundreds, whereas several thousand or even millions of qubits are needed for hard problems.
another challenge is that qubits are difficult to manufacture, and some of the qubits won’t behave as expected, requiring researchers to add extra qubits for quantum error correction.
and although quantum computers will be capable of addressing problems that we currently have no way of solving, they likely will not replace our familiar computers for everyday tasks.
“we’re not going to have a quantum computer in my laptop or phone,” said margaret martonosi, the hugh trumbull adams ’35 professor of computer science.
“it’s a fairly unique and narrow set of algorithms where quantum computers have an advantage over classical computers.”
one of the unique and narrow algorithms, however, could crack the encryption codes in use today to protect credit card transactions on the internet.
the potential misuse of quantum power is driving the search for new quantum cryptography methods.
martonosi is one of the pioneers thinking about how quantum computers will make the transition from laboratory prototypes into practical, functioning devices.
this area of research is called computer architecture, and involves everything from how a quantum computer would interface with existing technologies to what types of software would be compatible with quantum systems.
in today’s computers, software plays the role of coordinating and translating bits into calculations and results.
the same applies to quantum computing.
martonosi and her team are developing programs called compilers that read and translate high-level programming languages down to the level of the computer’s qubits.
“our compiler uses advanced optimization techniques to exploit the better-behaving qubits,” she said.
she is also developing software to explore which algorithms work best with different kinds of qubits, and is optimistic about recent developments in the field.
“every new qubit in a quantum computer, if it behaved in an ideal way, would actually double the capability of a quantum computer,” martonosi said.
“this would be faster and better than the largest supercomputer on earth.
that will be an important milestone.”
although truly powerful quantum computers with millions of qubits are still years away, the technologies for creating this advantage are edging closer.
our knowledge has progressed to the point where rather than simply studying quantum mechanics, we are on the verge of unlocking vast new capabilities utilizing its bizarre, ghostly concepts.
written by tom garlinghouse
featured news from related categories:
a dramatic increase in the amount of time data can be stored on a single atom means silicon could once again play a vital role in the development of super-fast computers.
the silicon chip revolutionised most aspects of everyday life since it was invented in the 1950s.
it's changed the way that we communicate with each other, and how we operate almost all everyday items, from cars to airplanes, fridges to televisions and our smart-phones and tablets.
the reason for this is that silicon can be "crafted" into a dazzling array of complex electronic structures and devices, such as the billion or so transistors crammed into each silicon chip.
while modern computers use these silicon chips (or integrated circuits) to perform an array of complex calculations, there are still some important problems that existing computers can't solve.
for example, medical researchers would love to be able to invent new pharmaceuticals with computer-aided design, much like the way automotive engineers design new cars, but they cannot do this today.
the reason is that the molecules that make up the medicine are not "macro" objects, like a car, but they live in the "micro" or quantum world, which is far more complex to calculate.
in fact, no computer as we know it today will ever be able to properly design such molecular systems.
so we must turn to a new type of computer – a quantum computer – in which the "bits" of data used for the calculations are themselves stored on quantum particles, like individual atoms, or electrons.
such quantum computers are also expected to be able to solve other important problems, such as searching large data sets, or solving complex financial problems.
the search for the best qubit
for the past two decades or so, researchers around the world have been exploring a range of different physical systems to act as the "quantum bits" in such a quantum computer.
now it appears that silicon, which underpinned the previous information revolution, could well provide the key to the next quantum revolution.
over the past three years, our two research teams at unsw have shown that silicon can be used to make functioning quantum bits, or qubits.
in particular we found that a single atom of phosphorus could be used to tightly hold an electron, which also carries a "spin" (like a tiny magnet) that could be used as a quantum bit.
but the binary code (0 or 1) stored on the electron spin got scrambled very quickly, making a fairly poor qubit.
the core of the phosphorus atom also contains a nuclear spin, which could act as an excellent memory storage qubit thanks to its very weak sensitivity to the noise present in the surrounding environment.
even so, when placed inside a "natural" silicon chip, a phosphorus nuclear spin loses the quantum information encoded on it in less than a second.
storage time increased
new research published in nature nanotechnology – two papers from our groups and one from a dutch-us collaboration – show that the accuracy and lifetime of silicon qubits are now in a realm that makes them suitable for the manufacture of large-scale quantum computers.
our teams in australia have used a specially purified type of silicon that contains only one isotope, called si-28.
this isotope is completely non-magnetic, because its nucleus has no spin.
the electrical properties of a chip of purified si-28 are identical to those of natural silicon, and so it works equally well for any electronic device.
but when an electron or nuclear spin qubit are configured inside pure si-28, the absence of magnetic noise allows us to store and manipulate the quantum state with unprecedented accuracy.
in one of the new papers our team demonstrated that we can perform quantum logic operations on a single electron trapped in an "artificial atom", which is created by small metallic electrodes on the surface of the chip.
these devices are remarkably similar to existing silicon transistors, providing great promise for commercial manufacture.
thanks to the ultra-pure si-28, we can now reach an accuracy of quantum operations well above 99%.
this accuracy is significant because it surpasses the minimum requirement to ensure that the (rare) errors can be corrected using special codes.
in a separate paper we report a similar accuracy, beyond 99%, for the operations on the electron spin held by a phosphorus "natural atom" in the same si-28 material.
in addition, with the nuclear spin of the phosphorus we have established the new world record for how long quantum information can be held onto a quantum bit in solid state: above 35 seconds, which is an eternity in the quantum world.
the accuracy of the operations was a staggering 99.99%.
with the exquisite quantum bits now demonstrated within a silicon electronic device, building functional quantum computers has become a much more realistic prospect.
the new quantum revolution might well be built upon the old, trusted and omnipresent silicon microchip.
provided by the conversation
this story is published courtesy of the conversation (under creative commons-attribution/no derivatives).
australian engineers have created a new quantum bit which remains in a stable superposition for 10 times longer than previously achieved, dramatically expanding the time during which calculations could be performed in a future silicon quantum computer.
the new quantum bit, made up of the spin of a single atom in silicon and merged with an electromagnetic field - known as 'dressed qubit' - retains quantum information for much longer that an 'undressed' atom, opening up new avenues to build and operate the superpowerful quantum computers of the future.
the result by a team at australia's university of new south wales (unsw), appears today in the online version of the international journal, nature nanotechnology.
"we have created a new quantum bit where the spin of a single electron is merged together with a strong electromagnetic field," said arne laucht, a research fellow at the school of electrical engineering & telecommunications at unsw, and lead author of the paper.
"this quantum bit is more versatile and more long-lived than the electron alone, and will allow us to build more reliable quantum computers."
building a quantum computer has been called the 'space race of the 21st century' - a difficult and ambitious challenge with the potential to deliver revolutionary tools for tackling otherwise impossible calculations, such as the design of complex drugs and advanced materials, or the rapid search of massive, unsorted databases.
its speed and power lie in the fact that quantum systems can host multiple 'superpositions' of different initial states, which in a computer are treated as inputs which, in turn, all get processed at the same time.
"the greatest hurdle in using quantum objects for computing is to preserve their delicate superpositions long enough to allow us to perform useful calculations," said andrea morello, leader of the research team and a program manager in the centre for quantum computation & communication technology (cqc2t) at unsw.
"our decade-long research program had already established the most long-lived quantum bit in the solid state, by encoding quantum information in the spin of a single phosphorus atom inside a silicon chip, placed in a static magnetic field," he said.
what laucht and colleagues did was push this further: "we have now implemented a new way to encode the information: we have subjected the atom to a very strong, continuously oscillating electromagnetic field at microwave frequencies, and thus we have 'redefined' the quantum bit as the orientation of the spin with respect to the microwave field."
the results are striking: since the electromagnetic field steadily oscillates at a very high frequency, any noise or disturbance at a different frequency results in a zero net effect.
the researchers achieved an improvement by a factor of 10 in the time span during which a quantum superposition can be preserved.
specifically, they measured a dephasing time of t2*=2.4 milliseconds - a result that is 10-fold better than the standard qubit, allowing many more operations to be performed within the time span during which the delicate quantum information is safely preserved.
"this new 'dressed qubit' can be controlled in a variety of ways that would be impractical with an 'undressed qubit',", added morello.
"for example, it can be controlled by simply modulating the frequency of the microwave field, just like in an fm radio.
the 'undressed qubit' instead requires turning the amplitude of the control fields on and off, like an am radio.
"in some sense, this is why the dressed qubit is more immune to noise: the quantum information is controlled by the frequency, which is rock-solid, whereas the amplitude can be more easily affected by external noise".
since the device is built upon standard silicon technology, this result paves the way to the construction of powerful and reliable quantum processors based upon the same fabrication process already used for today's computers.
the unsw team leads the world in developing quantum computing in silicon, and morello's team is part of the consortium of unsw researchers who have struck a a$70 million deal between unsw, the researchers, business and the australian government to develop a prototype silicon quantum integrated circuit - the first step in building the world's first quantum computer in silicon.
a functional quantum computer would allow massive increases in speed and efficiency for certain computing tasks - even when compared with today's fastest silicon-based 'classical' computers.
in a number of key areas - such as searching large databases, solving complicated sets of equations, and modelling atomic systems such as biological molecules and drugs - they would far surpass today's computers.they would also be enormously useful in the finance and healthcare industries, and for government, security and defence organisations.
quantum computers could identify and develop new medicines by greatly accelerating the computer-aided design of pharmaceutical compounds (and minimising lengthy trial and error testing), and develop new, lighter and stronger materials spanning consumer electronics to aircraft.
they would also make possible new types of computational applications and solutions that are beyond our ability to foresee.
provided by university of new south wales
researchers with the department of energy's oak ridge national laboratory have demonstrated a new level of control over photons encoded with quantum information.
their research was published in optica.
joseph lukens, brian williams, nicholas peters, and pavel lougovski, research scientists with ornl's quantum information science group, performed distinct, independent operations simultaneously on two qubits encoded on photons of different frequencies, a key capability in linear optical quantum computing.
qubits are the smallest unit of quantum information.
quantum scientists working with frequency-encoded qubits have been able to perform a single operation on two qubits in parallel, but that falls short for quantum computing.
"to realize universal quantum computing, you need to be able to do different operations on different qubits at the same time, and that's what we've done here," lougovski said.
according to lougovski, the team's experimental system -- two entangled photons contained in a single strand of fiber-optic cable -- is the "smallest quantum computer you can imagine.
this paper marks the first demonstration of our frequency-based approach to universal quantum computing."
"a lot of researchers are talking about quantum information processing with photons, and even using frequency," said lukens.
"but no one had thought about sending multiple photons through the same fiber-optic strand, in the same space, and operating on them differently."
the team's quantum frequency processor allowed them to manipulate the frequency of photons to bring about superposition, a state that enables quantum operations and computing.
unlike data bits encoded for classical computing, superposed qubits encoded in a photon's frequency have a value of 0 and 1, rather than 0 or 1.
this capability allows quantum computers to concurrently perform operations on larger datasets than today's supercomputers.
using their processor, the researchers demonstrated 97 percent interference visibility -- a measure of how alike two photons are -- compared with the 70 percent visibility rate returned in similar research.
their result indicated that the photons' quantum states were virtually identical.
the researchers also applied a statistical method associated with machine learning to prove that the operations were done with very high fidelity and in a completely controlled fashion.
"we were able to extract more information about the quantum state of our experimental system using bayesian inference than if we had used more common statistical methods," williams said.
"this work represents the first time our team's process has returned an actual quantum outcome."
williams pointed out that their experimental setup provides stability and control.
"when the photons are taking different paths in the equipment, they experience different phase changes, and that leads to instability," he said.
"when they are traveling through the same device, in this case, the fiber-optic strand, you have better control."
stability and control enable quantum operations that preserve information, reduce information processing time, and improve energy efficiency.
the researchers compared their ongoing projects, begun in 2016, to building blocks that will link together to make large-scale quantum computing possible.
"there are steps you have to take before you take the next, more complicated step," peters said.
"our previous projects focused on developing fundamental capabilities and enable us to now work in the fully quantum domain with fully quantum input states."
lukens said the team's results show that "we can control qubits' quantum states, change their correlations, and modify them using standard telecommunications technology in ways that are applicable to advancing quantum computing."
once the building blocks of quantum computers are all in place, he added, "we can start connecting quantum devices to build the quantum internet, which is the next, exciting step."
much the way that information is processed differently from supercomputer to supercomputer, reflecting different developers and workflow priorities, quantum devices will function using different frequencies.
this will make it challenging to connect them so they can work together the way today's computers interact on the internet.
this work is an extension of the team's previous demonstrations of quantum information processing capabilities on standard telecommunications technology.
furthermore, they said, leveraging existing fiber-optic network infrastructure for quantum computing is practical: billions of dollars have been invested, and quantum information processing represents a novel use.
the researchers said this "full circle" aspect of their work is highly satisfying.
"we started our research together wanting to explore the use of standard telecommunications technology for quantum information processing, and we have found out that we can go back to the classical domain and improve it," lukens said.
lukens, williams, peters, and lougovski collaborated with purdue university graduate student hsuan-hao lu and his advisor andrew weiner.
the research is supported by ornl's laboratory directed research and development program.
researchers at the university of waterloo have developed a method that could pave the way to establishing universal standards for measuring the performance of quantum computers.
the new method, called cycle benchmarking, allows researchers to assess the potential of scalability and to compare one quantum platform against another.
"this finding could go a long way toward establishing standards for performance and strengthen the effort to build a large-scale, practical quantum computer," said joel wallman, an assistant professor at waterloo's faculty of mathematics and institute for quantum computing.
"a consistent method for characterizing and correcting the errors in quantum systems provides standardization for the way a quantum processor is assessed, allowing progress in different architectures to be fairly compared."
cycle benchmarking provides a solution that helps quantum computing users to both determine the comparative value of competing hardware platforms and increase the capability of each platform to deliver robust solutions for their applications of interest.
the breakthrough comes as the quantum computing race is rapidly heating up, and the number of cloud quantum computing platforms and offerings is quickly expanding.
in the past month alone, there have been significant announcements from microsoft, ibm and google.
this method determines the total probability of error under any given quantum computing applications when the application is implemented through randomized compiling.
this means that cycle benchmarking provides the first cross-platform means of measuring and comparing the capabilities of quantum processors that is customized to users' applications of interest.
"thanks to google's recent achievement of quantum supremacy, we are now at the dawn of what i call the `quantum discovery era', said joseph emerson, a faculty member at iqc.
"this means that error-prone quantum computers will deliver solutions to interesting computational problems, but the quality of their solutions can no longer be verified by high-performance computers.
"we are excited because cycle benchmarking provides a much-needed solution for improving and validating quantum computing solutions in this new era of quantum discovery."
emerson and wallman founded the iqc spin-off quantum benchmark inc., which has already licensed this technology to several world-leading quantum computing providers, including google's quantum ai effort.
quantum computers offer a fundamentally more powerful way of computing, thanks to quantum mechanics.
compared to a traditional or digital computer, quantum computers can solve certain types of problems more efficiently.
however, qubits -- the basic processing unit in a quantum computer -- are fragile; any imperfection or source of noise in the system can cause errors that lead to incorrect solutions under a quantum computation.
gaining control over a small-scale quantum computer with just one or two qubits is the first step in a larger, more ambitious endeavour.
a larger quantum computer may be able to perform increasingly complex tasks, like machine learning or simulating complex systems to discover new pharmaceutical drugs.
engineering a larger quantum computer is challenging; the spectrum of error pathways becomes more complicated as qubits are added and the quantum system scales.
characterizing a quantum system produces a profile of the noise and errors, indicating if the processor is performing the tasks or calculations, it is being asked to do.
to understand the performance of any existing quantum computer for a complex problem or to scale up a quantum computer by reducing errors, it's first necessary to characterize all significant errors affecting the system.
wallman, emerson and a group of researchers at the university of innsbruck identified a method to assess all error rates affecting a quantum computer.
they implemented this new technique for the ion trap quantum computer at the university innsbruck and found that error rates don't increase as the size of that quantum computer scales up a very promising result.
"cycle benchmarking is the first method for reliably checking if you are on the right track for scaling up the overall design of your quantum computer," said wallman.
"these results are significant because they provide a comprehensive way of characterizing errors across all quantum computing platforms."
physicists have found a way to drastically prolong the shelf life of quantum bits, the 0s and 1s of quantum computers.
these precarious bits, formed in this case by arrays of semiconductor quantum dots containing a single extra electron, are easily perturbed by magnetic field fluctuations from the nuclei of the atoms creating the quantum dot.
this perturbation causes the bits to essentially forget the piece of information they were tasked with storing.
a quantum dot is a semiconductor nanostructure that is one candidate for creating quantum bits.
the scientists, including the university of michigan's duncan steel, used lasers to elicit a previously undiscovered natural feedback reaction that stabilizes the quantum dot's magnetic field, lengthening the stable existence of the quantum bit by several orders of magnitude, or more than 1,000 times.
the findings are published in the june 25 edition of nature.
because of their ability to represent multiple states simultaneously, quantum computers could theoretically factor numbers dramatically faster and with smaller computers than conventional computers.
for this reason, they could vastly improve computer security.
"in our approach, the quantum bit for information storage is an electron spin confined to a single dot in a semiconductor like indium arsenide.
rather than representing a 0 or a 1 as a transistor does in a classical computer, a quantum bit can be a linear combination of 0 and 1.
it's sort of like hitting two piano keys at the same time," said steel, a professor in the department of physics and the robert j. hiller professor of electrical engineering and computer science.
"one of the serious problems in quantum computing is that anything that disturbs the phase of one of these spins relative to the other causes a loss of coherence and destroys the information that was stored.
it is as though one of the two notes on the piano is silenced, leaving only the other note."
spin is an intrinsic property of the electron that isn't rotation, but is more like magnetic poles.
electrons are said to have spin up or down, which represent the 0s and 1s.
a major cause of information loss in a popular class of semiconductors called 3/5 materials is the interaction of the electron (the quantum bit) with the nuclei of the atoms in the quantum dot holding the electron.
trapping the electron in a particular spin, as is necessary in quantum computers, gives rise to a small magnetic field that couples with the magnetic field in the nuclei and breaks down the memory in a few billionths of a second.
by exciting the quantum dot with a laser, the scientists were able to block the interaction of these magnetic fields.
the laser causes an electron in the quantum dot to jump to a higher energy level, leaving behind a charged hole in the electron cloud.
this hole, or space vacated by an electron, also has a magnetic field due to the collective spin of the remaining electron cloud.
it turns out that the hole acts directly with the nuclei and controls its magnetic field without any intervention from outside except the fixed excitation by the lasers to create the hole.
"this discovery was quite unexpected," steel said.
"naturally occurring, nonlinear feedback in physical systems is rarely observed.
we found a remarkable piece of physics in nature.
we still have other major technical obstacles, but our work shows that one of the major hurdles to quantum computers that we thought might be a show-stopper isn't one," steel said.
the paper is called "optically-controlled locking of the nuclear field via coherent dark-state spectroscopy."
source: university of michigan (news : web)
(phys.org)—we're now one step closer to quantum computing becoming a reality thanks to research led by a team of university of sydney physicists, who have found a new way to detect changes in charges smaller than one electron.
the research is published in this week's edition of physical review letters.
"our new method for detecting charge in quantum systems is exciting and has implications for a range of nanotechnologies," said associate professor david reilly, from the arc centre for engineered quantum systems in the school of physics at the university of sydney.
"we've been successful in finding a new, more convenient way to detect changes in charge of a single electron on quantum dots.
quantum dots are nanoscale systems that can confine or trap single electrons," explained associate professor reilly.
"electrons confined to quantum dots are very nice systems for storing and manipulating quantum information, where data is encoded in the quantum mechanical aspects of the electron.
our goal is to scale-up a large number of quantum dots to ultimately create a machine to process quantum information - a quantum computer."
ever since nobel prize winner richard feynman highlighted the potential of quantum computing in the 1980s, scientists have been attempting to build quantum computers capable of solving some of the largest and most complex problems, with much greater efficiency than conventional computers.
"we've focused on quantum dots as their properties can be tuned in the laboratory - we can control their energy spectrum by turning a knob in the lab."
"being able to detect single electron charges on the quantum dots is absolutely essential, as it's the way information is retrieved from such quantum mechanical systems.
we call it 'read-out' and it's analogous to reading information from the memory or a hard drive in a regular classical computer," said associate professor reilly.
"without the ability to read-out quantum information, we have no way of getting the answer to a computation!"
the team, including school of physics phd students james colless, alice mahoney and john hornibrook, and associate professor andrew doherty and associate professor david reilly, with two scientists from the university of california, santa barbara, have found a new way of detecting charge on the quantum dots using the gate electrodes already in the system.
"previously, sensitive electrometers which measure minute charges were used to read-out the electron state on quantum dots.
these work well, but they are somewhat separate devices built onto the ends of the quantum dot system.
they are a bit like having microphones nearby that can pick up the sound of electrons," explained associate professor reilly.
"what we have shown is that the gates or electrodes that are already in place to create the quantum dot in the first place, can also act as read-out detectors.
this means you don't need separate devices and you don't need to worry about how to place those separate electrometer devices."
"whereas the old system was like having microphones nearby to detect sound, our new system could be likened to using the walls of a room as in-built microphones - you don't need separate microphones for every room of the house, just use the walls as microphones," said associate professor reilly.
"our new method makes the whole quantum system easier to build and use, as adding nanoscale electrometers for every quantum dot in a million-dot-array is a hard problem.
by using the electrodes already in the system, we've found an efficient new way to measure charge in the big quantum systems of the future."
the new method of detection allows for read-out in large dot arrays with no limitation on the size of the array for the read-out method to work.
james colless, whose phd research contributed greatly to the finding, said, "the technologies that we are developing are part of a global research effort to advance the prospect of quantum computing.
in a similar way to how billions of transistors can now be placed on a single silicon computer chip, in the future we would like to engineer semiconductor chips containing huge numbers of interacting quantum two-level systems - called qubits.
the work presented in this paper suggests a new method of reading out qubits that enables this goal."
provided by university of sydney
you hear a lot about quantum computers.
how they'll be super fast and super powerful.
there are even companies claiming to make the first simple versions of quantum computers.
but what makes a computer "quantum?"
here are five things to know about quantum computers.
1.
quantum computers use qubits.
while classical computers encode bits as zeros and ones.
qubits can be one, zero or a superposition of both.
2.
because qubits can be in multiple states at once, a quantum computer has inherent paralellism.
that means a while your computer can work on one thing at a time, albeit very fast on today's processors, quantum computers can work on millions of things a at a time.
3.
quantum computers will be best at factoring large numbers, making them super fast at breaking encryption or searching a large database.
4.
quantum computers can read data without looking at it.
measuring a qubit can change its state and affect the outcome.
so quantum computers entangle atoms, meaning one atom always reflects the state of another.
that way you can know what state the first atom is without measuring it and changing its state.
5.
there's debate about whether we're really there yet.
the uncertainty principle in this case is just how quantum our computers are.
companies like d-wave use quantum principles in their computing but most agree that practical quantum computers are still years away.
i know what you're thinking.
you're in a superposition of both understanding and not understanding quantum computers.
well here's more from techrepublic to help you out:
see: quantum computing: the smart person's guide
see: d-wave quantum computers: the smart person's guide
also see:
the race toward the first practical quantum computer is in full stride.
companies, countries, collaborators, and competitors worldwide are vying for quantum supremacy.
google says it's already there.
but what does that mean?
how will the world know when it's been achieved?
using classical computers, computational scientists at pnnl have set a mark that a quantum system would need to surpass to establish quantum supremacy in the realm of chemistry.
that's because the fastest classical computers available today are getting better and better at simulating what a quantum computer will eventually be expected to do.
to prove itself in the real world, a quantum computer will need to be able to outdo what a fast supercomputer can do.
and that's where the pnnl-led team have set a benchmark for quantum computers to beat.
"classical simulation of quantum chemistry problems serves as a goalpost for quantum computers," said karol kowalski, a computational chemist at pnnl.
"when a quantum computer can beat what our best parallel computing systems can do, quantum computing developers will know they are where they need to be.
this is a benchmark to inspire innovation."
at 113 electrons, the recent benchmark simulation is the largest quantum system ever simulated at this precise level of accuracy using a classical computer.
working with collaborators in hungary and the czech republic, the pnnl team set the benchmark by simulating the structure of an important chemical structure in nitrogenase, an enzyme that converts nitrogen in the atmosphere into usable fertilizer for plants.
the enzyme is the subject of intense study because it may hold to key to producing enough food to feed an ever-growing global population.
understanding how this enzyme is able to break the strong nitrogen triple bond, while expending very little energy, could be key to new catalyst design, eventually providing abundant fertilizer currently produced using a chemical process requiring large energy inputs.
shrinking the quantum chemistry problem
"complex quantum chemistry is exactly the kind of problem where having a quantum computer available could really make a difference," said sriram krishnamoorthy, a high-performance computing expert and quantum computing lead scientist at pnnl.
"we are working on creating the programs that will run on quantum computers.
"when quantum computers arrive, we will be ready for them," said krishnamoorthy.
krishnamoorthy, kowalski, and their pnnl colleagues are working collaboratively with partners at microsoft, through the northwest quantum nexus, to both simulate how a quantum computer will work and write programs that will work on any quantum computer that emerges from the intense global competition.
"conventional computers, including today's fastest supercomputers, are inadequate for simulating quantum systems required to describe challenging and important molecular systems and processes," said kowalski.
"better computational tools are needed to understand chemical systems and design new materials."
until a full-scale quantum computer is available, the pnnl team worked with microsoft experts to develop a bridge between current digital computers and what comes next.
the workflow takes advantage of what classical computers do well now, while using the current capabilities of quantum computing to describe chemical transformations relevant to industrial processes such as energy generation and energy storage.
the key, according to the research team, was to take the output of a classical computer and be able to convert that information into an input that can be interpreted by a quantum computer.
the researchers published that quantum computing method in mid-2019.
since then, the pnnl team has taken another huge step in bridging classical and quantum computers.
they developed a computer algorithm that takes advantage of a mathematical trick called "downfolding."
essentially, downfolding makes difficult and time-consuming calculations possible on current test-bed quantum computers.
"this is like shrinking a large box into a much smaller box," said kowalski.
"in this case, the box represents a huge numerical space.
we use a more compact description in a quantum computer, and what comes out accurately represents the energy of the much larger system.
it's a bridge between classical computing and what will be quantum computing in the coming years."
it may seem like a mathematical magic trick, but kowalski adds that the method uses properties of quantum mechanics and a series of rigorous mathematical theories that are reliable and reproducible.
opening new doors
the downfolding method not only opens up avenues to quantum computing, it also makes possible new, much more efficient and accurate ways of analyzing and validating the reams of data generated every day from the u.s. investment in u.s. department of energy (doe)-supported light sources used to study our world in subatomic detail.
"we have shown how the quantum behavior of excited electronic states can be analyzed with hamiltonian downfolding," said kowalski.
"this provides a way to use theory to validate data interpretation."
these interim steps in the path to quantum computing are essential because they provide essential benchmarks that help show how close the world is to achieving quantum supremacy.
"we will be able to test the output of quantum computers against these calculations," said krishnamoorthy.
"if quantum computers can produce results close to these results, we will know they work."
more information: jiří brabec, et al.
massively parallel quantum chemical density matrix renormalization group method.
arxiv:2001.04890v1 [physics.chem-ph]: https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.04890
nicholas p. bauman et al.
downfolding of many-body hamiltonians using active-space models: extension of the sub-system embedding sub-algebras approach to unitary coupled cluster formalisms, the journal of chemical physics (2019).
doi: 10.1063/1.5094643
nicholas p. bauman et al.
quantum simulations of excited states with active-space downfolded hamiltonians, the journal of chemical physics (2019).
doi: 10.1063/1.5128103
provided by pacific northwest national laboratory
a team of scientists, led by professor winfried hensinger at the university of sussex, have made a major breakthrough concerning one of the biggest problems facing quantum computing: how to reduce the disruptive effects of environmental "noise" on the highly sensitive function of a large-scale quantum computer.
in the real-world, technological developments need to operate in imperfect conditions; what can be successfully tested in a highly controlled laboratory may fail when presented with realistic environmental factors, such as the fluctuations in voltage from an electronic component or stray electromagnetic fields emitted by everyday electronic equipment.
the university of sussex's ion quantum technology group have managed to dramatically reduce the effects of such environmental "noise" affecting trapped ion quantum computers, reporting their findings in an article that has today, thursday 1 november 2018, been published in the prestigious journal physical review letters.
it means the team is one step closer to building a large-scale quantum computer with the capability to solve challenging real-world problems.
small-scale quantum computers currently in existence only contain a handful of quantum bits—components of quantum computers that store information and can exist in multiple states, also referred to as qubits.
as such, current quantum computers are small enough to be operated in a highly controlled environment inside a specialized laboratory.
however, such machines do not have the processing power required to solve complex problems because of the limited number of qubits.
when built, large-scale quantum computers will be able to solve certain problems that would take even the fastest super computers billions of years to calculate.
in order to create a quantum computer that can solve such problems, scientists will need to increase the number of qubits, which in turn will increase the size of the quantum computer.
the problem is that the more qubits that are added, the more difficult it becomes to isolate the computer from any realistic "noise" that would disrupt the computing processes.
hensinger's team of university of sussex physicists have made a quantum computing breakthrough that is capable of mitigating some of these problems.
they collaborated with theoretical scientist dr. florian mintert and colleagues from imperial college london, who proposed a theory of how one might be able to solve this problem by manipulating the strange quantum effects in use inside a quantum computer.
the theory allows—making use of the strange properties of quantum physics—the execution of quantum computations in such a way that changes in the initial operational parameters of the machine do not lead to a substantial change in the end result of the computation.
this in turn helps to insulate the quantum computer from the effects of environmental 'noise'.
dr. sebastian weidt, senior scientist in the sussex ion quantum technology group, explains the significance: "realising this technique may have a profound impact on the ability to develop commercial ion trap quantum computers beyond use in an academic laboratory."
the sussex team went to work to see whether they could actually implement this theory.
they used complicated radio-frequency and microwave signals capable of manipulating the quantum effects inherent in individual charged atoms (ions), to demonstrate this in practical experiments.
their implementation is based on microwave technology, such as that present in mobile phones.
following months of intensive work in the laboratory, the sussex scientists have managed to make this new method a reality, experimentally demonstrating its capabilities to substantially reduce the effect of "noise" on a trapped ion quantum computer.
prof hensinger, head of the ion quantum technology group at the university of sussex—which last year unveiled the first blueprint for a large-scale quantum computer—says: "with this advance we have made another practical step towards constructing quantum computers that can host millions of qubits.
such machines are capable of solving certain problems that even the fastest supercomputer may take billions of years to calculate and be of great benefit to humanity; they may be able to help us create new pharmaceuticals; find new cures for diseases, such as dementia; create powerful tools for the financial sector; be of benefit to agriculture, through more efficient fertilizer production, among many other applications.
we are only starting to understand the tremendous potential of these machines."
hensinger's group is now utilising this new technique as they put the final touches to a powerful quantum computer prototype that is currently in their laboratory at the university of sussex.
hensinger says: "it's now time to translate academic achievements into the construction of practical machines.
we're in a fantastic position to do this at sussex and my team is working round the clock to make large-scale quantum computing a future reality."
provided by university of sussex
researchers have succeeded in combining the power of quantum computing with the security of quantum cryptography and have shown that perfectly secure cloud computing can be achieved using the principles of quantum mechanics.
they have performed an experimental demonstration of quantum computation in which the input, the data processing, and the output remain unknown to the quantum computer.
the international team of scientists will publish the results of the experiment, carried out at the vienna center for quantum science and technology (vcq) at the university of vienna and the institute for quantum optics and quantum information (iqoqi), in the forthcoming issue of science.
quantum computers are expected to play an important role in future information processing since they can outperform classical computers at many tasks.
considering the challenges inherent in building quantum devices, it is conceivable that future quantum computing capabilities will exist only in a few specialized facilities around the world – much like today's supercomputers.
users would then interact with those specialized facilities in order to outsource their quantum computations.
the scenario follows the current trend of cloud computing: central remote servers are used to store and process data – everything is done in the "cloud."
the obvious challenge is to make globalized computing safe and ensure that users' data stays private.
the latest research, to appear in science, reveals that quantum computers can provide an answer to that challenge.
"quantum physics solves one of the key challenges in distributed computing.
it can preserve data privacy when users interact with remote computing centers," says stefanie barz, lead author of the study.
this newly established fundamental advantage of quantum computers enables the delegation of a quantum computation from a user who does not hold any quantum computational power to a quantum server, while guaranteeing that the user's data remain perfectly private.
the quantum server performs calculations, but has no means to find out what it is doing – a functionality not known to be achievable in the classical world.
the scientists in the vienna research group have demonstrated the concept of "blind quantum computing" in an experiment: they performed the first known quantum computation during which the user's data stayed perfectly encrypted.
the experimental demonstration uses photons, or "light particles" to encode the data.
photonic systems are well-suited to the task because quantum computation operations can be performed on them, and they can be transmitted over long distances.
the process works in the following manner.
the user prepares qubits – the fundamental units of quantum computers – in a state known only to himself and sends these qubits to the quantum computer.
the quantum computer entangles the qubits according to a standard scheme.
the actual computation is measurement-based: the processing of quantum information is implemented by simple measurements on qubits.
the user tailors measurement instructions to the particular state of each qubit and sends them to the quantum server.
finally, the results of the computation are sent back to the user who can interpret and utilize the results of the computation.
even if the quantum computer or an eavesdropper tries to read the qubits, they gain no useful information, without knowing the initial state; they are "blind."
more information: "demonstration of blind quantum computing" stefanie barz, elham kashefi, anne broadbent, joseph fitzsimons, anton zeilinger, philip walther.
doi: 10.1126/science.1214707
provided by university of vienna
in a major step toward making a quantum computer using everyday materials, a team led by researchers at princeton university has constructed a key piece of silicon hardware capable of controlling quantum behavior between two electrons with extremely high precision.
the study was published dec. 7 in the journal science.
the team constructed a gate that controls interactions between the electrons in a way that allows them to act as the quantum bits of information, or qubits, necessary for quantum computing.
the demonstration of this nearly error-free, two-qubit gate is an important early step in building a more complex quantum computing device from silicon, the same material used in conventional computers and smartphones.
"we knew we needed to get this experiment to work if silicon-based technology was going to have a future in terms of scaling up and building a quantum computer," said jason petta, a professor of physics at princeton university.
"the creation of this high-fidelity two-qubit gate opens the door to larger scale experiments."
silicon-based devices are likely to be less expensive and easier to manufacture than other technologies for achieving a quantum computer.
although other research groups and companies have announced quantum devices containing 50 or more qubits, those systems require exotic materials such as superconductors or charged atoms held in place by lasers.
quantum computers can solve problems that are inaccessible with conventional computers.
the devices may be able to factor extremely large numbers or find the optimal solutions for complex problems.
they could also help researchers understand the physical properties of extremely small particles such as atoms and molecules, leading to advances in areas such as materials science and drug discovery.
building a quantum computer requires researchers to create qubits and couple them to each other with high fidelity.
silicon-based quantum devices use a quantum property of electrons called "spin" to encode information.
the spin can point either up or down in a manner analogous to the north and south poles of a magnet.
in contrast, conventional computers work by manipulating the electron's negative charge.
achieving a high-performance, spin-based quantum device has been hampered by the fragility of spin states—they readily flip from up to down or vice versa unless they can be isolated in a very pure environment.
by building the silicon quantum devices in princeton's quantum device nanofabrication laboratory, the researchers were able to keep the spins coherent—that is, in their quantum states—for relatively long periods of time.
to construct the two-qubit gate, the researchers layered tiny aluminum wires onto a highly ordered silicon crystal.
the wires deliver voltages that trap two single electrons, separated by an energy barrier, in a well-like structure called a double quantum dot.
by temporarily lowering the energy barrier, the researchers allow the electrons to share quantum information, creating a special quantum state called entanglement.
these trapped and entangled electrons are now ready for use as qubits, which are like conventional computer bits but with superpowers: while a conventional bit can represent a zero or a 1, each qubit can be simultaneously a zero and a 1, greatly expanding the number of possible permutations that can be compared instantaneously.
"the challenge is that it's very difficult to build artificial structures small enough to trap and control single electrons without destroying their long storage times," said david zajac, a graduate student in physics at princeton and first-author on the study.
"this is the first demonstration of entanglement between two electron spins in silicon, a material known for providing one of the cleanest environments for electron spin states."
the researchers demonstrated that they can use the first qubit to control the second qubit, signifying that the structure functioned as a controlled not (cnot) gate, which is the quantum version of a commonly used computer circuit component.
the researchers control the behavior of the first qubit by applying a magnetic field.
the gate produces a result based on the state of the first qubit: if the first spin is pointed up, then the second qubit's spin will flip, but if the first spin is down, the second one will not flip.
"the gate is basically saying it is only going to do something to one particle if the other particle is in a certain configuration," petta said.
"what happens to one particle depends on the other particle."
the researchers showed that they can maintain the electron spins in their quantum states with a fidelity exceeding 99 percent and that the gate works reliably to flip the spin of the second qubit about 75 percent of the time.
the technology has the potential to scale to more qubits with even lower error rates, according to the researchers.
"this work stands out in a worldwide race to demonstrate the cnot gate, a fundamental building block for quantum computation, in silicon-based qubits," said hongwen jiang, a professor of physics and astronomy at the university of california-los angeles.
"the error rate for the two-qubit operation is unambiguously benchmarked.
it is particularly impressive that this extraordinarily difficult experiment, which requires a sophisticated device fabrication and an exquisite control of quantum states, is done in a university lab consisting of only a few researchers."
provided by princeton university
in a step toward making a quantum computer using everyday materials, a team led by researchers at princeton university has constructed a key piece of silicon hardware capable of controlling quantum behaviour between two electrons with extremely high precision.
the study was published in the journal science.
the team constructed a gate that controls interactions between the electrons in a way that allows them to act as the quantum bits of information, or qubits, necessary for quantum computing.
the demonstration of this nearly error-free, two-qubit gate is an important early step in building a more complex quantum computing device from silicon, the same material used in conventional computers and smartphones.
"we knew we needed to get this experiment to work if silicon-based technology was going to have a future in terms of scaling up and building a quantum computer," said jason petta, a professor of physics at princeton university.
"the creation of this high-fidelity two-qubit gate opens the door to larger scale experiments."
silicon-based devices are likely to be less expensive and easier to manufacture than other technologies for achieving a quantum computer.
although other research groups and companies have announced quantum devices containing 50 or more qubits, those systems require exotic materials such as superconductors or charged atoms held in place by lasers.
quantum computers can solve problems that are inaccessible with conventional computers.
the devices may be able to factor extremely large numbers or find the optimal solutions for complex problems.
they could also help researchers understand the physical properties of extremely small particles such as atoms and molecules, leading to advances in areas such as materials science and drug discovery.
building a quantum computer requires researchers to create qubits and couple them to each other with high fidelity.
silicon-based quantum devices use a quantum property of electrons called "spin" to encode information.
the spin can point either up or down in a manner analogous to the north and south poles of a magnet.
in contrast, conventional computers work by manipulating the electron's negative charge.
achieving a high-performance, spin-based quantum device has been hampered by the fragility of spin states -- they readily flip from up to down or vice versa unless they can be isolated in a very pure environment.
by building the silicon quantum devices in princeton's quantum device nanofabrication laboratory, the researchers were able to keep the spins coherent - that is, in their quantum states - for relatively long periods of time.
to construct the two-qubit gate, the researchers layered tiny aluminum wires onto a highly ordered silicon crystal.
the wires deliver voltages that trap two single electrons, separated by an energy barrier, in a well-like structure called a double quantum dot.
by temporarily lowering the energy barrier, the researchers allow the electrons to share quantum information, creating a special quantum state called entanglement.
these trapped and entangled electrons are now ready for use as qubits, which are like conventional computer bits but with superpowers: while a conventional bit can represent a zero or a 1, each qubit can be simultaneously a zero and a 1, greatly expanding the number of possible permutations that can be compared instantaneously.
"the challenge is that it's very difficult to build artificial structures small enough to trap and control single electrons without destroying their long storage times," said david zajac, a graduate student in physics at princeton and first-author on the study.
"this is the first demonstration of entanglement between two electron spins in silicon, a material known for providing one of the cleanest environments for electron spin states."
the researchers demonstrated that they can use the first qubit to control the second qubit, signifying that the structure functioned as a controlled not (cnot) gate, which is the quantum version of a commonly used computer circuit component.
the researchers control the behaviour of the first qubit by applying a magnetic field.
the gate produces a result based on the state of the first qubit: if the first spin is pointed up, then the second qubit's spin will flip, but if the first spin is down, the second one will not flip.
"the gate is basically saying it is only going to do something to one particle if the other particle is in a certain configuration," petta said.
"what happens to one particle depends on the other particle."
the researchers showed that they can maintain the electron spins in their quantum states with a fidelity exceeding 99% and that the gate works reliably to flip the spin of the second qubit about 75% of the time.
the technology has the potential to scale to more qubits with even lower error rates, according to the researchers.
ibm research has made its quantum computing power available to members of the public to run experiments.
the system is currently an approach towards building a universal quantum computer.
the cloud-enabled quantum computing platform, called ibm quantum experience, will allow users to run algorithms and experiments on ibm’s quantum processor, work with the individual quantum bits (qubits), and explore tutorials and simulations around what might be possible with quantum computing.
“quantum computers are very different from today’s computers, not only in what they look like and are made of, but more importantly in what they can do.
quantum computing is becoming a reality and it will extend computation far beyond what is imaginable with today’s computers,” said arvind krishna, senior vice president and director, ibm research.
“this moment represents the birth of quantum cloud computing.
by giving hands-on access to ibm’s experimental quantum systems, the ibm quantum experience will make it easier for researchers and the scientific community to accelerate innovations in the quantum field, and help discover new applications for this technology.”
for more information, visit ibm.
sources: press materials received from the company and additional information gleaned from the company’s website.
the space race of the cold war saw the us and russia develop a wide range of aerospace technologies.
but a new race is about to begin, mostly among corporations, and the winner will unlock the power of the quantum computing realm.
the security rapture
in the past 30 years, computing has given rise to many key technologies, most importantly the internet, which have had a massive impact on the global economy.
banks can be accessed remotely, shopping can be done using a phone, and stocks can be traded at the push of a button.
but sending messages to perform such tasks must be encrypted to prevent attackers from obtaining sensitive information.
as a result, many different forms of cryptography have been developed to encrypt messages that would take billions of years for a computer to attack.
prime numbers are key to modern cryptography systems due to their difficulty in calculation and so prime numbers have to be found as opposed to being calculated (i.e., there is no general formula for predicting prime numbers).
while there have always been vulnerabilities in computing, we're about to enter a new era of dealing with cryptological threats.
practical quantum computers are very close to becoming a reality.
quantum computers, unlike traditional computers, utilize quantum effects to perform calculations on quantum states which can perform multiple calculations simultaneously.
in fact, 30 qubits alone can perform 1 billion calculations simultaneously.
with the ability to perform such calculations, quantum computers could trivially solve modern cryptographic systems, partly because finding very large prime numbers would be much easier.
quantum computers are already in existence but they are not yet practical machines—each utilizes a relatively small number of qubits and they're mainly for scientific research.
but when quantum computers become more common, emphasis on quantum-level security will be of paramount importance.
this is why the race among corporations to build practical quantum computers (and security measures against them) has begun.
here's a look at some recent initiatives surrounding the issue of quantum computing.
programming quantum computers
even though current quantum computer systems are not yet practical, many are already trying to tackle the issue of how to appropriately program them.
traditional computers (those based on good old binary), are linear systems and run instructions one by one which makes creating and following programs easy.
a quantum computer, however, is more of a mathematical machine whereby complex quantum algorithms are configured using quantum gates and then quantum data fed into the system n number of times to produce a result.
however, tech companies have started to think about how quantum computers can actually be used.
microsoft’s new language, q#, is a quantum computer language designed to run on classical computers so that users can develop quantum projects in the visual studio environment.
microsoft has also released four tutorials, called “katas”, that teach the basics of quantum computing.
each tutorial has examples and outputs that allow the user to test their quantum programs to see if they are correct.
the four tutorials cover basic quantum gates, superposition, measurements, and the deutsch-jozsa algorithm.
meanwhile, google has recently announced cirq, an open-source framework for developing quantum algorithms and programs on nisq computers (noisy intermediate scale quantum).
while currently, quantum algorithms developed do not run on a real quantum computer, they do provide a framework for development.
like q#, cirq can be downloaded via github but is coded in python, which allows development of quantum algorithms on most platforms.
interestingly, cirq allows the creation of quantum circuits and gates by simulating molecules and properties of materials—but, as they are simulations, performing large quantum calculations is impossible (which is to say that security systems are theoretically safe for now).
an incubator for quantum development
ibm, one of the companies on the quantum frontlines, has created a network called the “ibm q network”.
its main aim is to bring leading companies together to help push the boundaries of quantum computing technologies and explore practical applications for business and science.
in their own words, the goal of the program is to "cut through the hype and focus on the present state of quantum computing and how organizations, and developers can prepare for the future."
who are the companies in this program and where are they from?
a quick bit of research shows that they are companies mainly situated in the west such as zapta computing (cambridge), strangeworks (austin), and qc ware (palo alto).
legislators attempt to keep up
this quantum race is also seeing legislation in law.
last month, texas congressman will hurd warned of a computing threat from competitors such as china and russia.
in response to this threat, hurd has highlighted a proposal in congress, the national quantum initiative act, that would put position the us as a leader in quantum information science.
introduced by fellow texan, u.s. house science, space, and technology committee chairman lamar smith, the national quantum initiative act aims to do things like support quantum development on us soil, identify and address "research gaps" and employment issues for american quantum research, and establish a national quantum coordination office to organize these efforts.
conclusion
the era of quantum computing is approaching.
when practical quantum computers arrive, current cryptographic methods will not be able to protect sensitive data.
but who will get the technology first?
will the power be used to exploit banks and the stock market?
or will it be used to immediately create new cryptographic solutions?
the reality is probably a combination of the two—quantum computing can and will be used for good and for ill.
what would you like to learn about when it comes to quantum computers?
let us know in the comments below.
featured image courtesy of ibm.
read more
researchers have demonstrated the first quantum light-emitting diode (led) that emits single photons and entangled photon pairs with a wavelength of around 1550 nm, which lies within the standard telecommunications window.
a single-photon source that operates at this wavelength is expected to serve as a key component in future quantum networks, long-distance quantum communication systems, quantum cryptography devices, and other applications.
the researchers, tina müller et al., at toshiba research europe limited, the university of sheffield, and the university of cambridge, have published a paper on the new quantum light source in a recent issue of nature communications.
"for the first time, quantum devices can meet the fundamental requirements of state-of-the art quantum key distribution and quantum communication systems," müller told phys.org.
the ability to emit single photons and entangled photon pairs in the telecom window has been a goal in the field of quantum optics for a long time.
although a variety of different light sources exist that can emit single and entangled photons (from individual atoms to color centers in diamond), until now they have been largely limited to shorter wavelengths that are unsuitable for quantum network applications.
in the new study, the researchers fabricated light-emitting quantum dot devices based on indium phosphide, a material that is currently used in quantum dot lasers to generate laser light with a 1550-nm wavelength.
to enable this material to emit single photons and entangled photon pairs at this wavelength, the researchers used a growth method called metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy to grow individual indium phosphide quantum dot "droplets," which form the basis for the quantum leds.
another advantage of the new quantum leds is that they can operate at temperatures of up to 93 k, which is significantly higher than the operating temperatures of other quantum light sources.
a higher operating temperature allows for easier integration with existing devices, and the researchers expect that the operating temperature of the new devices could be improved even further with some modifications.
going forward, the researchers anticipate that the new quantum leds will have a significant impact on the development of quantum network technology, including the quantum internet.
for example, the devices can be integrated with quantum relays and repeaters to extend the range of quantum networks.
the researchers also expect that the quantum light sources can operate in pulsed mode when integrated with radio frequency electronics.
their next steps will be to make improvements in order to realize these applications.
"we will further optimize the performance and size of our devices to facilitate integration in long-distance quantum communications systems," müller said.
© 2018 phys.org
researchers at the australian national university (anu) have taken a major leap forward to provide practical building blocks for a global quantum internet.
the team, led by associate professor matthew sellars, have shown that an erbium-doped crystal is uniquely suited to enable a global telecommunications network that harnesses the weird properties of quantum mechanics.
"the effort to build a quantum computer is often described as the 'space race of the 21st century', but today's computers didn't realise their full potential until we had the internet," said sellars, program manager in the centre for quantum computation and communication technology (cqc2t) at anu.
"we have shown that an erbium-doped crystal is the perfect material to form the building blocks of a quantum internet that will unlock the full potential of future quantum computers.
we had this idea 10 years ago, but many of our peers told us that such a simple idea couldn't work.
seeing this result, it feels great to know that our approach was the right one."
the work, published in nature physics, demonstrates how to dramatically improve the storage time of a telecom-compatible quantum memory, a crucial challenge that has eluded researchers worldwide.
"a telecom-compatible quantum memory is a vital component for a practical quantum internet," said dr rose ahlefeldt, decra fellow at anu and cqc2t.
"memories allow us to buffer and synchronise quantum information, operations necessary for long range quantum communication.
at the moment, researchers are using memories that don't work at the right wavelength, and have to employ a complicated conversion process to and from the communications wavelength.
this can be inefficient, and means they have to do three very difficult things instead of just one," she said.
erbium, a rare earth ion, has unique quantum properties such that it operates in the same band as existing fibre optic networks, eliminating the need for a conversion process.
"the unique advantage of our technology is that it operates in the same 1550 nanometre band as today's telecommunications infrastructure, making it compatible with the fibre optic cables found in existing networks," said first author and phd candidate miloš ranči?.
"we've shown that erbium ions in a crystal can store quantum information for more than a second, which is 10,000 times longer than other attempts, and is long enough to one day send quantum information throughout a global network."
sellars said the new technology can also be operated as a quantum light source or used as an optical link for solid-state quantum computing devices, connecting them to the quantum internet.
"not only is our material compatible with existing fibre optics, but it's versatility means it will be able to connect with many types of quantum computers including cqc2t's silicon qubits, and superconducting qubits such as those being developed by google and ibm," said sellars.
"this result is so exciting to me because it allows us to take a lot of the in-principle work we've demonstrated and turn it into practical devices for a full-scale quantum internet."
provided by centre for quantum computation & communication technology
(phys.org) -- one of the main sticking points to creating a true quantum computer capable of performing meaningful work, is the problem of storing quantum state information in memory.
recent efforts have resulted in highly efficient memory that lasted only a short time or low efficient memory that lasts longer.
now, a combined group of two teams, one from china and one from germany, have come up with a way that appears to offer the best of both worlds.
as they describe in their paper published in the journal nature physics, they found that they were able to store quantum information in atomic spin waves.
spin waves are where the electronic spin of one atom is transferred to another and then to another and so on propagating through a group.
in this new research, the team found that by embedding information in a spin wave, and then retrieving it later, they could take advantage of the time it takes for the propagation to occur all the way though all of the atoms, thus allowing for holding onto quantum state information for a specified period of time.
to make this come about, the team built a magneto-optical trap that first slowed atoms down using a laser beam.
once slowed, the atoms were held steady using magnets in a vertical triangular trap.
when a photon was introduced, it caused a spin that was propagated through the atoms, creating a spin wave.
at the other end, another laser fired at the same frequency as the first but with the opposite polarization caused the spin to be converted back into a photon, which revealed the quantum state information that had been held first in the original photon, and then conveyed through the wave.
using this technique, the team found that they could hold on to the quantum state information for 3.2 milliseconds and that the process was between seventy one and seventy five percent efficient.
what’s more, the team believes that if optical lattices were introduced into the trap, i.e.
crossed laser beams with different frequencies, they could make the whole system even more efficient.
they also believe that this new process could be used as a means for creating memory storage in an actual quantum computer.
more information: efficient and long-lived quantum memory with cold atoms inside a ring cavity, nature physics (2012) doi:10.1038/nphys2324
abstract
quantum memories are regarded as one of the fundamental building blocks of linear-optical quantum computation and long-distance quantum communication.
a long-standing goal to realize scalable quantum information processing is to build a long-lived and efficient quantum memory.
there have been significant efforts distributed towards this goal.
however, either efficient but short-lived or long-lived but inefficient quantum memories have been demonstrated so far.
here we report a high-performance quantum memory in which long lifetime and high retrieval efficiency meet for the first time.
by placing a ring cavity around an atomic ensemble, employing a pair of clock states, creating a long-wavelength spin wave and arranging the set-up in the gravitational direction, we realize a quantum memory with an intrinsic spin wave to photon conversion efficiency of 73(2)% together with a storage lifetime of 3.2(1) ms.
this realization provides an essential tool towards scalable linear-optical quantum information processing.
© 2012 phys.org
an australian team led by researchers at the university of new south wales has achieved a breakthrough in quantum science that brings the prospect of a network of ultra-powerful quantum computers - connected via a quantum internet –closer to reality.
the team is the first in the world to have detected the spin, or quantum state, of a single atom using a combined optical and electrical approach.
the study is a collaboration between researchers from the arc centre of excellence for quantum computation and communication technology based at unsw, the australian national university and the university of melbourne.
it is published in the journal nature.
unsw's professor sven rogge said the technical feat was achieved with a single atom of erbium – a rare earth element commonly used in communications - embedded in silicon.
"we have the best of both worlds with our combination of an electrical and optical system.
this is a revolutionary new technique, and people had doubts it was possible.
it is the first step towards a global quantum internet," professor rogge said.
quantum computers promise to deliver an exponential increase in processing power over conventional computers by using a single electron or nucleus of an atom as the basic processing unit - a quantum bit, or qubit.
by performing multiple calculations simultaneously, quantum computers are expected to have applications in economic modelling, fast database searches, modelling of quantum materials and biological molecules and drugs, and encryption and decryption of information.
in a qubit, information is stored in the spin, or magnetic orientation, of the electron or nucleus.
due to a quantum property known as superposition, spin can not only be up or down, but in both states at once.
to produce a functioning qubit, scientists must be able to control, or change, the spin state and then detect, or "read" it.
professor rogge said researchers had previously used either an electrical or an optical method to read the spin of a single atom, but not both methods together.
lead author of the study, unsw's dr chunming yin, said the new approach opens up the possibility of using light to couple the atoms, or qubits, together to form a quantum computer.
"using light to transfer information in the quantum state is easier than doing it electrically.
ultimately this will lead to quantum communications over long distances," dr yin said.
associate professor matthew sellars, of the australian national university, said it was a step towards connecting a solid state quantum computer to what will be the quantum internet.
"the quantum internet will allow separate quantum computers to be integrated and it will enable encrypted communications."
quantum communication systems will become critical for providing secure communications for government, military, defence, finance business and health industries.
to make the new quantum device, associate professor jeffrey mccallum at the university of melbourne used an ion implanter to shoot erbium atoms into a standard industrial silicon transistor.
when the atom was in a particular quantum state and laser light was shone on it, an electron was knocked off the atom.
this was detected electrically, by the silicon transistor switching on.
professor rogge said the breakthrough was made possible by combining the expertise of the three groups.
the next step would be to control the spin of the erbium atom, which should be relatively straightforward, and also to replicate their results using a phosphorus atom embedded in silicon.
the researchers said it will be at least another decade before the potential of quantum computation is fully realised.
provided by university of new south wales
for many years, quantum computers were not much more than an idea.
today, companies, governments and intelligence agencies are investing in the development of quantum technology.
robert könig, professor for the theory of complex quantum systems at the tum, in collaboration with david gosset from the institute for quantum computing at the university of waterloo and sergey bravyi from ibm, has now placed a cornerstone in this promising field.
why should quantum computers be faster?
conventional computers obey the laws of classical physics.
they rely on the binary numbers 0 and 1.
these numbers are stored and used for mathematical operations.
in conventional memory units, each bit -- the smallest unit of information -- is represented by a microscopic dot on a microchip.
each of these dots can hold a charge that determines whether the bit is set to 1 or 0.
in a quantum computer, however, a bit can be both 0 and 1 at the same time.
this is because the laws of quantum physics allow electrons to be in multiple places at one time.
quantum bits, or qubits, thus exist in multiple overlapping states.
this so-called superposition allows quantum computers to perform operations on many values in one fell swoop whereas a single conventional computer typically must execute these operations sequentially.
the promise of quantum computing lies in the ability to solve certain problems significantly faster.
from conjecture to proof
könig and his colleagues have now conclusively demonstrated the advantage of quantum computers.
to this end, they developed a quantum circuit that can solve a specific "difficult" algebraic problem.
the new circuit has a simple structure: it only performs a fixed number of operations on each qubit.
such a circuit is referred to as having a constant depth.
in their work, the researchers prove that the problem at hand cannot be solved using classical constant-depth circuits.
they furthermore answer the question of why the quantum algorithm beats any comparable classical circuit: the quantum algorithm exploits the non-locality of quantum physics.
prior to this work, the advantage of quantum computers had neither been proven nor experimentally demonstrated -- notwithstanding that evidence pointed in this direction.
one example is shor's quantum algorithm, which efficiently solves the problem of prime factorization.
however, it is merely a complexity-theoretic conjecture that this problem cannot be efficiently solved without quantum computers.
it is also conceivable that the right approach has simply not yet been found for classical computers.
a step on the road to quantum computing
robert könig considers the new results primarily as a contribution to complexity theory.
"our result shows that quantum information processing really does provide benefits -- without having to rely on unproven complexity-theoretic conjectures," he says.
beyond this, the work provides new milestones on the road to quantum computers.
because of its simple structure, the new quantum circuit is a candidate for a near-term experimental realization of quantum algorithms.
further information
the results have fallen on fertile ground in munich: a globally acclaimed quantum technology research focus has been established here in recent years, with a new research building for quantum research under construction at the tum in garching.
in september the tum, together with the ludwig-maximilians-universität münchen (lmu), was awarded the contract for the cluster of excellence munich center for quantum science and technology (mcqst).
quantum computing has the potential to revolutionize technology, medicine, and science by providing faster and more efficient processors, sensors, and communication devices.
but transferring information and correcting errors within a quantum system remains a challenge to making effective quantum computers.
in a paper in the journal nature, researchers from purdue university and the university of rochester, including john nichol, an assistant professor of physics, and rochester ph.d. students yadav p. kandel and haifeng qiao, demonstrate their method of relaying information by transferring the state of electrons.
the research brings scientists one step closer to creating fully functional quantum computers and is the latest example of rochester's initiative to better understand quantum behavior and develop novel quantum systems.
the university recently received a $4 million grant from the department of energy to explore quantum materials.
quantum computers
a quantum computer operates on the principles of quantum mechanics, a unique set of rules that govern at the extremely small scale of atoms and subatomic particles.
when dealing with particles at these scales, many of the rules that govern classical physics no longer apply and quantum effects emerge; a quantum computer is able to perform complex calculations, factor extremely large numbers, and simulate the behaviors of atoms and particles at levels that classical computers cannot.
quantum computers have the potential to provide more insight into principles of physics and chemistry by simulating the behavior of matter at unusual conditions at the molecular level.
these simulations could be useful in developing new energy sources and studying the conditions of planets and galaxies or comparing compounds that could lead to new drug therapies.
"you and i are quantum systems.
the particles in our body obey quantum physics.
but, if you try to compute what happens with all of the atoms in our body, you cannot do it on a regular computer," nichol says.
"a quantum computer could easily do this."
quantum computers could also open doors for faster database searches and cryptography.
"it turns out that almost all of modern cryptography is based on the extreme difficulty for regular computers to factor large numbers," nichol says.
"quantum computers can easily factor large numbers and break encryption schemes, so you can imagine why lots of governments are interested in this."
bits vs. qubits
a regular computer consists of billions of transistors, called bits.
quantum computers, on the other hand, are based on quantum bits, also known as qubits, which can be made from a single electron.
unlike ordinary transistors, which can be either "0" or "1," qubits can be both "0" and "1" at the same time.
the ability for individual qubits to occupy these "superposition states," where they are simultaneously in multiple states, underlies the great potential of quantum computers.
just like ordinary computers, however, quantum computers need a way to transfer information between qubits, and this presents a major experimental challenge.
"a quantum computer needs to have many qubits, and they're really difficult to make and operate," nichol says.
"the state-of-the art right now is doing something with only a few qubits, so we're still a long ways away from realizing the full potential of quantum computers."
all computers, including both regular and quantum computers and devices like smart phones, also have to perform error correction.
a regular computer contains copies of bits so if one of the bits goes bad, "the rest are just going to take a majority vote" and fix the error.
however, quantum bits cannot be copied, nichol says, "so you have to be very clever about how you correct for errors.
what we're doing here is one step in that direction."
manipulating electrons
quantum error correction requires that individual qubits interact with many other qubits.
this can be difficult because an individual electron is like a bar magnet with a north pole and a south pole that can point either up or down.
the direction of the pole—whether the north pole is pointing up or down, for instance—is known as the electron's magnetic moment or quantum state.
if certain kinds of particles have the same magnetic moment, they cannot be in the same place at the same time.
that is, two electrons in the same quantum state cannot sit on top of each other.
"this is one of the main reasons something like a penny, which is made out of metal, doesn't collapse on itself," nichol says.
"the electrons are pushing themselves apart because they cannot be in the same place at the same time."
if two electrons are in opposite states, they can sit on top of each other.
a surprising consequence of this is that if the electrons are close enough, their states will swap back and forth in time.
"if you have one electron that's up and another electron that's down and you push them together for just the right amount of time, they will swap," nichol says.
"they did not switch places, but their states switched."
to force this phenomenon, nichol and his colleagues cooled down a semiconductor chip to extremely low temperatures.
using quantum dots—nanoscale semiconductors—they trapped four electrons in a row, then moved the electrons so they came in contact and their states switched.
"there's an easy way to switch the state between two neighboring electrons, but doing it over long distances—in our case, it's four electrons—requires a lot of control and technical skill," nichol says.
"our research shows this is now a viable approach to send information over long distances."
a first step
transmitting the state of an electron back and forth across an array of qubits, without moving the position of electrons, provides a striking example of the possibilities allowed by quantum physics for information science.
"this experiment demonstrates that information in quantum states can be transferred without actually transferring the individual electron spins down the chain," says michael manfra, a professor of physics and astronomy at purdue university.
"it is an important step for showing how information can be transmitted quantum-mechanically—in manners quite different than our classical intuition would lead us to believe."
nichol likens this to the steps that led from the first computing devices to today's computers.
that said, will we all someday have quantum computers to replace our desktop computers?
"if you had asked that question of ibm in the 1960s, they probably would've said no, there's no way that's going to happen," nichol says.
"that's my reaction now.
but, who knows?"
provided by university of rochester
(phys.org) —australian engineers detect in real-time the quantum spin properties of a pair of atoms inside a silicon chip, and disclose new method to perform quantum logic operations between two atoms.
a team of electrical engineers at unsw australia has observed the unique quantum behaviour of a pair of spins in silicon and designed a new method to use them for "2-bit" quantum logic operations.
these milestones bring researchers a step closer to building a quantum computer, which promises dramatic data processing improvements.
quantum bits, or qubits, are the building blocks of quantum computers.
while many ways to create a qubit exist, the australian team has focused on the use of single atoms of phosphorus, embedded inside a silicon chip similar to those used in normal computers.
the unsw team had already shown the world-first operation of a quantum bit based upon the magnetic dipole (or "spin") of a single phosphorus atom, placed near a silicon transistor.
the next natural step was to take two atoms and connect them to perform logic operations.
"when two atoms are placed close together, the electrons that belong to them acquire a striking quantum behaviour, where the spin direction of each electron no longer exists individually, but only in relation to the direction of the other," associate professor andrea morello of the school of electrical engineering & telecommunications says.
"these unique quantum states are at the heart of quantum computation, and for the first time we have been able to observe them directly."
the first author on the experimental work, phd student juan pablo dehollain, recalls the first time he realised what he was looking at.
"we clearly saw these two distinct quantum states, but they behaved very differently from what we were used to with a single atom.
we had a real 'eureka!'
moment when we realised what was happening – we were seeing in real time the `entangled' quantum states of a pair of atoms."
the experiments were performed at the arc centre of excellence for quantum computation & communication technology, as a collaborative effort between the team led by morello, and a group consisting of professor andrew dzurak (unsw), professor david jamieson (university of melbourne), and dr andre saraiva at the university of wisconsin-madison (us).
new design for quantum logic operations
placing two phosphorus atoms close to each other is not enough to perform a logic operation of the kind necessary to run a quantum computing calculation.
"for a long time it was thought that, for the quantum computer to work, the distance between the atoms had to be set with exquisite precision – essentially, you had to place the phosphorus with atomic precision within the silicon crystal," morello says.
now his team has developed and patented a new strategy that allows much more tolerance in the atom's placement.
the first author of this paper, phd student rachpon kalra, explains, "this new idea will allow performing 2-bit quantum logic gates between pairs of atoms placed in a wide range of distances from one another.
"technologically, this is a real breakthrough, because it will permit building quantum computers using the same fabrication method used for normal silicon transistors."
all modern silicon microchips, as found in any computer or mobile phone, contain millions or billions of transistors, whose electrical properties are fine-tuned by introducing different atoms such as phosphorus.
the industry-standard method to introduce the atoms does not allow atomic-level precision in their final position.
however, the new design for a quantum logic gate by the unsw team is tailor-made to ensure that the existing technology remains usable to build quantum computers.
the key breakthrough to arrive at this new idea was to exploit the ability to control the nuclear spin of each atom.
this ability was demonstrated for the first time by the unsw team in 2013, and published in a landmark paper in nature.
with that insight, the team has now conceived a unique way to use the nuclei as facilitators for the quantum logic operation between the electrons.
"it is this key idea, grounded in the experimental reality, that will give us a way to make robust quantum logic gates without the need for atomic precision in the placement of the atoms", kalra says.
a clear road ahead
the two papers published this week, in the prestigious journals physical review letters and physical review x, dissipate many of the clouds that still potentially obscured the path towards a silicon-based quantum computer.
the unsw team is currently working on the experimental demonstration of their ideas, and expects to have implemented a 2-qubit logic gate very soon.
more information: "single-shot readout and relaxation of singlet and triplet states in exchange-coupled p31 electron spins in silicon."
phys.
rev.
lett.
112, 236801 – published 9 june 2014.
juan p. dehollain, juha t. muhonen, kuan y. tan, andre saraiva, david n. jamieson, andrew s. dzurak, and andrea morello.
http://journals.aps.org/prl/ab … ysrevlett.112.236801
"robust two-qubit gates for donors in silicon controlled by hyperfine interactions."
phys.
rev.
x 4, 021044 – published 6 june 2014.
rachpon kalra, arne laucht, charles d. hill, and andrea morello.
http://journals.aps.org/prx/ab … 03/physrevx.4.021044
provided by university of new south wales
quantum mechanics incorporates some very non-intuitive properties of matter.
quantum superposition, for example, allows an atom to be simultaneously in two different states with its spin axis pointed both up and down, or combinations in between.
a computer that uses quantum mechanical manipulation of atoms or particles therefore has many more possible options than a conventional one that works with "zeros" and "ones" and has only two choices, called bits.
a quantum computer's memory uses instead what are called quantum bits - qubits - and each qubit can be in a superposition of these two states.
as a result, theoretical physicists estimate a quantum computer with only about one hundred of these qubits could in principle exceed the computing power of the powerful current classical computers.
building a quantum computer is therefore one of the main technological goals in modern physics and astrophysics.
cfa physicist hannes pichler, of the cfa's institute for theoretical atomic, molecular and optical physics (itamp), and three colleagues have proposed a new way to build a quantum computer using just a single atom.
light quanta (photons) can be used as information carriers and act as qubits, but to use them in a quantum computer they must interact with each other.
under normal conditions, however, light does not interact with itself and so the challenge is to create correlations between them.
the key idea of their new paper is to allow light photons from an atom to interact with their own mirror image reflections.
photons that the atom emits are reflected by the mirror and can interact again with the atom but with a very slight time delay.
that delay, the scientists show, results in the combined waveform of the photons being so complex that in principle any quantum computation can be achieved by simply measuring the emitted photons.
the theoretical discovery is not only a conceptual breakthrough in quantum optics and information, it opens the door to new technology.
in particular, the proposed single atom setup is appealing since it minimizes the resources needed and relies only on elements that have already been demonstrated in state-of the-art experiments.
provided by harvard-smithsonian center for astrophysics
a research team lead by osaka university demonstrated how information encoded in the circular polarization of a laser beam can be translated into the spin state of an electron in a quantum dot, each being a quantum bit and a quantum computer candidate.
the achievement represents a major step towards a "quantum internet," in which future computers can rapidly and securely send and receive quantum information.
quantum computers have the potential to vastly outperform current systems because they work in a fundamentally different way.
instead of processing discrete ones and zeros, quantum information, whether stored in electron spins or transmitted by laser photons, can be in a superposition of multiple states simultaneously.
moreover, the states of two or more objects can become entangled, so that the status of one cannot be completely described without this other.
handling entangled states allow quantum computers to evaluate many possibilities simultaneously, as well as transmit information from place to place immune from eavesdropping.
however, these entangled states can be very fragile, lasting only microseconds before losing coherence.
to realize the goal of a quantum internet, over which coherent light signals can relay quantum information, these signals must be able to interact with electron spins inside distant computers.
researchers led by osaka university used laser light to send quantum information to a quantum dot by altering the spin state of a single electron trapped there.
while electrons don't spin in the usual sense, they do have angular momentum, which can be flipped when absorbing circularly polarized laser light.
"importantly, this action allowed us to read the state of the electron after applying the laser light to confirm that it was in the correct spin state," says first author takafumi fujita.
"our readout method used the pauli exclusion principle, which prohibits two electrons from occupying the exact same state.
on the tiny quantum dot, there is only enough space for the electron to pass the so-called pauli spin blockade if it has the correct spin."
quantum information transfer has already been used for cryptographic purposes.
"the transfer of superposition states or entangled states allows for completely secure quantum key distribution," senior author akira oiwa says.
"this is because any attempt to intercept the signal automatically destroys the superposition, making it impossible to listen in without being detected."
the rapid optical manipulation of individual spins is a promising method for producing a quantum nano-scale general computing platform.
an exciting possibility is that future computers may be able to leverage this method for many other applications, including optimization and chemical simulations.
research teams all over the world are exploring different ways to design a working computing chip that can integrate quantum interactions.
now, unsw engineers believe they have cracked the problem, reimagining the silicon microprocessors we know to create a complete design for a quantum computer chip that can be manufactured using mostly standard industry processes and components.
the new chip design, published in the journal nature communications, details a novel architecture that allows quantum calculations to be performed using existing semiconductor components, known as cmos (complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor) - the basis for all modern chips.
it was devised by andrew dzurak, director of the australian national fabrication facility at the university of new south wales (unsw), and dr menno veldhorst, lead author of the paper who was a research fellow at unsw when the conceptual work was done.
"we often think of landing on the moon as humanity's greatest technological marvel," said dzurak, who is also a program leader at australia's famed centre of excellence for quantum computation and communication technology (cqc2t).
"but creating a microprocessor chip with a billion operating devices integrated together to work like a symphony - that you can carry in your pocket!
- is an astounding technical achievement, and one that's revolutionised modern life.
"with quantum computing, we are on the verge of another technological leap that could be as deep and transformative.
but a complete engineering design to realise this on a single chip has been elusive.
i think what we have developed at unsw now makes that possible.
and most importantly, it can be made in a modern semiconductor manufacturing plant," he added.
veldhorst, now a team leader in quantum technology at qutech - a collaboration between delft university of technology and tno, the netherlands organisation for applied scientific research - said the power of the new design is that, for the first time, it charts a conceivable engineering pathway toward creating millions of quantum bits, or qubits.
"remarkable as they are, today's computer chips cannot harness the quantum effects needed to solve the really important problems that quantum computers will.
to solve problems that address major global challenges - like climate change or complex diseases like cancer - it's generally accepted we will need millions of qubits working in tandem.
to do that, we will need to pack qubits together and integrate them, like we do with modern microprocessor chips.
that's what this new design aims to achieve.
"our design incorporates conventional silicon transistor switches to 'turn on' operations between qubits in a vast two-dimensional array, using a grid-based 'word' and 'bit' select protocol similar to that used to select bits in a conventional computer memory chip," he added.
"by selecting electrodes above a qubit, we can control a qubit's spin, which stores the quantum binary code of a 0 or 1.
and by selecting electrodes between the qubits, two-qubit logic interactions, or calculations, can be performed between qubits."
a quantum computer exponentially expands the vocabulary of binary code used in modern computers by using two spooky principles of quantum physics - namely, 'entanglement' and 'superposition'.
qubits can store a 0, a 1, or an arbitrary combination of 0 and 1 at the same time.
and just as a quantum computer can store multiple values at once, so it can process them simultaneously, doing multiple operations at once.
this would allow a universal quantum computer to be millions of times faster than any conventional computer when solving a range of important problems.
but to solve complex problems, a useful universal quantum computer will need a large number of qubits, possibly millions, because all types of qubits we know are fragile, and even tiny errors can be quickly amplified into wrong answers.
"so we need to use error-correcting codes which employ multiple qubits to store a single piece of data," said dzurak.
"our chip blueprint incorporates a new type of error-correcting code designed specifically for spin qubits, and involves a sophisticated protocol of operations across the millions of qubits."
"it's the first attempt to integrate into a single chip all of the conventional silicon circuitry needed to control and read the millions of qubits needed for quantum computing."
"we expect that there will still be modifications required to this design as we move towards manufacture, but all of the key components that are needed for quantum computing are here in one chip".
"and that's what will be needed if we are to make quantum computers a workhorse for calculations that are well beyond today's computers," dzurak added.
"it shows how to integrate the millions of qubits needed to realise the true promise of quantum computing."
building such a universal quantum computer has been called the 'space race of the 21st century'.
for a range of calculations, they will be much faster than existing computers, and for some challenging problems they could find solutions in days, maybe even hours, when today's best supercomputers would take millions of years.
there are at least five major quantum computing approaches being explored worldwide: silicon spin qubits, ion traps, superconducting loops, diamond vacancies and topological qubits; unsw's design is based on silicon spin qubits.
the main problem with all of these approaches is that there is no clear pathway to scaling the number of quantum bits up to the millions needed without the computer becoming huge a system requiring bulky supporting equipment and costly infrastructure.
that's why unsw's new design is so exciting: relying on its silicon spin qubit approach - which already mimics much of the solid-state devices in silicon that are the heart of the us$380 billion global semiconductor industry - it shows how to dovetail spin qubit error correcting code into existing chip designs, enabling true universal quantum computation.
unlike almost every other major group elsewhere, cqc2t's quantum computing effort is obsessively focused on creating solid-state devices in silicon, from which all of the world's computer chips are made.
and they're not just creating ornate designs to show off how many qubits can be packed together, but aiming to build qubits that could one day be easily fabricated - and scaled up.
"it's kind of swept under the carpet a bit, but for large-scale quantum computing, we are going to need millions of qubits," said dzurak.
"here, we show a way that spin qubits can be scaled up massively.
and that's the key."
the design is a leap forward in silicon spin qubits; it was only two years ago, in a paper in nature, that dzurak and veldhorst showed, for the first time, how quantum logic calculations could be done in a real silicon device, with the creation of a two-qubit logic gate - the central building block of a quantum computer.
at the niels bohr institute, university of copenhagen, researchers have realized the swap of electron spins between distant quantum dots.
the discovery brings us a step closer to future applications of quantum information, as the tiny dots have to leave enough room on the microchip for delicate control electrodes.
the distance between the dots has now become big enough for integration with traditional microelectronics and perhaps, a future quantum computer.
the result is achieved via a multinational collaboration with purdue university and the university of sydney, australia, now published in nature communications.
size matters in quantum information exchange even on the nanometer scale
quantum information can be stored and exchanged using electron spin states.
the electrons' charge can be manipulated by gate-voltage pulses, which also controls their spin.
it was believed that this method can only be practical if quantum dots touch each other; if squeezed too close together the spins will react too violently, if placed too far apart the spins will interact far too slowly.
this creates a dilemma, because if a quantum computer is ever going to see the light of day, we need both, fast spin exchange and enough room around quantum dots to accommodate the pulsed gate electrodes.
normally, the left and right dots in the linear array of quantum dots are too far apart to exchange quantum information with each other.
frederico martins, postdoc at unsw, sydney, australia, explains: "we encode quantum information in the electrons' spin states, which have the desirable property that they don't interact much with the noisy environment, making them useful as robust and long-lived quantum memories.
but when you want to actively process quantum information, the lack of interaction is counterproductive -- because now you want the spins to interact!"
what to do?
you can't have both long lived information and information exchange -- or so it seems.
"we discovered that by placing a large, elongated quantum dot between the left dots and right dots, it can mediate a coherent swap of spin states, within a billionth of a second, without ever moving electrons out of their dots.
in other words, we now have both fast interaction and the necessary space for the pulsed gate electrodes ," says ferdinand kuemmeth, associate professor at the niels bohr institute.
collaborations are an absolute necessity, both internally and externally
the collaboration between researchers with diverse expertise was key to success.
internal collaborations constantly advance the reliability of nanofabrication processes and the sophistication of low-temperature techniques.
in fact, at the center for quantum devices, major contenders for the implementation of solid-state quantum computers are currently intensely studied, namely semiconducting spin qubits, superconducting gatemon qubits, and topological majorana qubits.
all of them are voltage-controlled qubits, allowing researchers to share tricks and solve technical challenges together.
but kuemmeth is quick to add that "all of this would be futile if we didn't have access to extremely clean semiconducting crystals in the first place."
michael manfra, professor of materials engineering, agrees: "purdue has put a lot of work into understanding the mechanisms that lead to quiet and stable quantum dots.
it is fantastic to see this work yield benefits for copenhagen's novel qubits."
the theoretical framework of the discovery is provided by the university of sydney, australia.
stephen bartlett, a professor of quantum physics at the university of sydney, said: "what i find exciting about this result as a theorist, is that it frees us from the constraining geometry of a qubit only relying on its nearest neighbours."
his team performed detailed calculations, providing the quantum mechanical explanation for the counterintuitive discovery.
overall, the demonstration of fast spin exchange constitutes not only a remarkable scientific and technical achievement, but may have profound implications for the architecture of solid-state quantum computers.
the reason is the distance: "if spins between non-neighboring qubits can be controllably exchanged, this will allow the realization of networks in which the increased qubit-qubit connectivity translates into a significantly increased computational quantum volume," predicts kuemmeth.
researchers at the niels bohr institute, together with colleagues in the us and australia, have developed a method to control a quantum bit for electronic quantum communication in a series of quantum dots, which behave like artificial atoms in the solid state.
the results have been published in the scientific journal physical review letters.
in a conventional computer, information is made up of bits, comprised of 0's and 1's.
in a quantum computer the 0 and 1 states can simultaneously exist, allowing a kind of parallel computation in which a large number of computational states are acted upon by the machine at the same time.
this can make a quantum computer exponentially faster than a conventional computer.
the problem with the quantum world, however, is that you cannot allow these states to be measured, or all of the quantum magic disappears.
"we have developed a new way of controlling the electrons so that the quantum state can be controlled without measurement, using resonances familiar in atomic physics, now applied to these artificial atoms," explains professor charles marcus, director of the center for quantum devices at the niels bohr institute at the university of copenhagen.
he explains that they are combining classical solid-state physics on a nanometer scale with resonance techniques of atomic physics.
in a semiconducting material (gaas) there are free electrons that move within the material structure.
the information is stored in the spin of the electrons which can turn up or down.
but the electrons and their spin must be controlled.
captures electrons and controls them
"we capture the electrons in 'boxes'.
each box consist of a quantum dot, which is an artificial atom.
the quantum dots are embedded in the semiconductor and each quantum dot can capture one electron.
there needs to be three quantum dots next to each other using nanometer-scale electrostatic metal gates.
when we open contact between the 'boxes' the electrons can sense each others' presence.
the three spins must coordinate their orientations because it cost extra energy to put electrons with the same spin into the same box.
to lower their energy, they not only spread out among the three boxes, but they orient their spins to further lower their energy.
the three boxes together form a single entity – a qubit or quantum bit," explains marcus.
an electrical signal is now sent from outside and by rapidly opening the boxes the system begins to swing in dynamic vibrations.
the researchers can use this to change the quantum state of the electrons.
"by combining three electrons in a triple quantum dot and oscillating an applied electric field at the frequency that separates adjacent energy levels, we can thus control the spins of the electrons without measuring them," explains charles marcus.
quantum computers for extreme applications
first, the technique itself was discovered.
the next step is not just a single sequence with three quantum dots, but several sequences.
each sequence forms one qubit and now a series of qubits need to talk to each other.
this could be realised by a quantum computer with more bits.
"the potential of a quantum computer is that it will be able to perform multiple calculations at once.
in that way it will be much faster than conventional computers and will be able to solve tasks that cannot currently be solved, because it simply takes too long," says charles marcus.
quantum computers are not expected to be something everyone will own, but rather an advanced set of tools for researchers who need to make extreme calculations.
provided by niels bohr institute
in a step that brings silicon-based quantum computers closer to reality, researchers at princeton university have built a device in which a single electron can pass its quantum information to a particle of light.
the particle of light, or photon, can then act as a messenger to carry the information to other electrons, creating connections that form the circuits of a quantum computer.
the research, published in the journal science and conducted at princeton and hrl laboratories in malibu, california, represents a more than five-year effort to build a robust capability for an electron to talk to a photon, said jason petta, a princeton professor of physics.
"just like in human interactions, to have good communication a number of things need to work out—it helps to speak the same language and so forth," petta said.
"we are able to bring the energy of the electronic state into resonance with the light particle, so that the two can talk to each other."
the discovery will help the researchers use light to link individual electrons, which act as the bits, or smallest units of data, in a quantum computer.
quantum computers are advanced devices that, when realized, will be able to perform advanced calculations using tiny particles such as electrons, which follow quantum rules rather than the physical laws of the everyday world.
each bit in an everyday computer can have a value of a 0 or a 1.
quantum bits—known as qubits—can be in a state of 0, 1, or both a 0 and a 1 simultaneously.
this superposition, as it is known, enables quantum computers to tackle complex questions that today's computers cannot solve.
simple quantum computers have already been made using trapped ions and superconductors, but technical challenges have slowed the development of silicon-based quantum devices.
silicon is a highly attractive material because it is inexpensive and is already widely used in today's smartphones and computers.
the researchers trapped both an electron and a photon in the device, then adjusted the energy of the electron in such a way that the quantum information could transfer to the photon.
this coupling enables the photon to carry the information from one qubit to another located up to a centimeter away.
quantum information is extremely fragile—it can be lost entirely due to the slightest disturbance from the environment.
photons are more robust against disruption and can potentially carry quantum information not just from qubit to qubit in a quantum computer circuit but also between quantum chips via cables.
for these two very different types of particles to talk to each other, however, researchers had to build a device that provided the right environment.
first, peter deelman at hrl laboratories, a corporate research-and-development laboratory owned by the boeing company and general motors, fabricated the semiconductor chip from layers of silicon and silicon-germanium.
this structure trapped a single layer of electrons below the surface of the chip.
next, researchers at princeton laid tiny wires, each just a fraction of the width of a human hair, across the top of the device.
these nanometer-sized wires allowed the researchers to deliver voltages that created an energy landscape capable of trapping a single electron, confining it in a region of the silicon called a double quantum dot.
the researchers used those same wires to adjust the energy level of the trapped electron to match that of the photon, which is trapped in a superconducting cavity that is fabricated on top of the silicon wafer.
prior to this discovery, semiconductor qubits could only be coupled to neighboring qubits.
by using light to couple qubits, it may be feasible to pass information between qubits at opposite ends of a chip.
the electron's quantum information consists of nothing more than the location of the electron in one of two energy pockets in the double quantum dot.
the electron can occupy one or the other pocket, or both simultaneously.
by controlling the voltages applied to the device, the researchers can control which pocket the electron occupies.
"we now have the ability to actually transmit the quantum state to a photon confined in the cavity," said xiao mi, a graduate student in princeton's department of physics and first author on the paper.
"this has never been done before in a semiconductor device because the quantum state was lost before it could transfer its information."
the success of the device is due to a new circuit design that brings the wires closer to the qubit and reduces interference from other sources of electromagnetic radiation.
to reduce this noise, the researchers put in filters that remove extraneous signals from the wires that lead to the device.
the metal wires also shield the qubit.
as a result, the qubits are 100 to 1000 times less noisy than the ones used in previous experiments.
eventually the researchers plan to extend the device to work with an intrinsic property of the electron known as its spin.
"in the long run we want systems where spin and charge are coupled together to make a spin qubit that can be electrically controlled," petta said.
"we've shown we can coherently couple an electron to light, and that is an important step toward coupling spin to light."
david divincenzo, a physicist at the institute for quantum information in rwth aachen university in germany, who was not involved in the research, is the author of an influential 1996 paper outlining five minimal requirements necessary for creating a quantum computer.
of the princeton-hrl work, in which he was not involved, divincenzo said: "it has been a long struggle to find the right combination of conditions that would achieve the strong coupling condition for a single-electron qubit.
i am happy to see that a region of parameter space has been found where the system can go for the first time into strong-coupling territory."
provided by princeton university
research teams all over the world are exploring different ways to design a working computing chip that can integrate quantum interactions.
now, a team of engineers may have cracked the problem, reimagining the silicon microprocessors we know to create a complete design for a quantum computer chip that can be manufactured using mostly standard industry processes and components.
the new chip design, published in the journal nature communications, details a novel architecture that allows quantum calculations to be performed using existing semiconductor components, known as cmos (complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor)—the basis for all modern chips.
it was devised by andrew dzurak, director of the australian national fabrication facility at the university of new south wales (unsw), and menno veldhorst, lead author of the paper who was a research fellow at unsw when the conceptual work was done.
"we often think of landing on the moon as humanity's greatest technological marvel," said dzurak, who is also a program leader at the centre of excellence for quantum computation and communication technology (cqc2t).
"but creating a microprocessor chip with a billion operating devices integrated together to work like a symphony (that you can carry in your pocket!)
is an astounding technical achievement, and one that's revolutionized modern life.
"with quantum computing, we are on the verge of another technological leap that could be as deep and transformative.
but a complete engineering design to realize this on a single chip has been elusive.
i think what we have developed at unsw now makes that possible.
and most importantly, it can be made in a modern semiconductor manufacturing plant," he added.
veldhorst said the power of the new design is that, for the first time, it charts a conceivable engineering pathway toward creating millions of quantum bits, or qubits.
"remarkable as they are, today's computer chips cannot harness the quantum effects needed to solve the really important problems that quantum computers will.
to solve problems that address major global challenges - like climate change or complex diseases like cancer - it's generally accepted we will need millions of qubits working in tandem.
to do that, we will need to pack qubits together and integrate them, like we do with modern microprocessor chips.
that's what this new design aims to achieve.
"our design incorporates conventional silicon transistor switches to 'turn on' operations between qubits in a vast two-dimensional array, using a grid-based 'word' and 'bit' select protocol similar to that used to select bits in a conventional computer memory chip," he added.
"by selecting electrodes above a qubit, we can control a qubit's spin, which stores the quantum binary code of a 0 or 1.
and by selecting electrodes between the qubits, two-qubit logic interactions, or calculations, can be performed between qubits."
building a quantum computer
a quantum computer exponentially expands the vocabulary of binary code used in modern computers by using two spooky principles of quantum physics - namely, 'entanglement' and 'superposition'.
qubits can store a 0, a 1, or an arbitrary combination of 0 and 1 at the same time.
and just as a quantum computer can store multiple values at once, so it can process them simultaneously, doing multiple operations at once.
this would allow a universal quantum computer to be millions of times faster than any conventional computer when solving a range of important problems.
but to solve complex problems, a useful universal quantum computer will need a large number of qubits, possibly millions, because all types of qubits we know are fragile, and even tiny errors can be quickly amplified into wrong answers.
"so we need to use error-correcting codes which employ multiple qubits to store a single piece of data," said dzurak.
"our chip blueprint incorporates a new type of error-correcting code designed specifically for spin qubits, and involves a sophisticated protocol of operations across the millions of qubits.
it's the first attempt to integrate into a single chip all of the conventional silicon circuitry needed to control and read the millions of qubits needed for quantum computing."
"we expect that there will still be modifications required to this design as we move towards manufacture, but all of the key components that are needed for quantum computing are here in one chip.
and that's what will be needed if we are to make quantum computers a workhorse for calculations that are well beyond today's computers," dzurak added.
"it shows how to integrate the millions of qubits needed to realise the true promise of quantum computing."
building such a universal quantum computer has been called the 'space race of the 21st century'.
for a range of calculations, they will be much faster than existing computers, and for some challenging problems they could find solutions in days, maybe even hours, when today's best supercomputers would take millions of years.
quantum computing
there are at least five major quantum computing approaches being explored worldwide: silicon spin qubits, ion traps, superconducting loops, diamond vacancies and topological qubits; unsw's design is based on silicon spin qubits.
the main problem with all of these approaches is that there is no clear pathway to scaling the number of quantum bits up to the millions needed without the computer becoming huge a system requiring bulky supporting equipment and costly infrastructure.
that's why unsw's new design is so exciting: relying on its silicon spin qubit approach—which already mimics much of the solid-state devices in silicon that are the heart of the $380-billion usd global semiconductor industry—it shows how to dovetail spin qubit error correcting code into existing chip designs, enabling true universal quantum computation.
unlike almost every other major group elsewhere, cqc2t's quantum computing effort is focused on creating solid-state devices in silicon, from which all of the world's computer chips are made.
and they're not just creating ornate designs to show off how many qubits can be packed together, but aiming to build qubits that could one day be easily fabricated and scaled up.
"it's kind of swept under the carpet a bit, but for large-scale quantum computing, we are going to need millions of qubits," said dzurak.
"here, we show a way that spin qubits can be scaled up massively.
and that's the key."
it was only two years ago, in a paper in nature, that dzurak and veldhorst showed, for the first time, how quantum logic calculations could be done in a real silicon device, with the creation of a two-qubit logic gate: the central building block of a quantum computer.
"those were the first baby steps, the first demonstrations of how to turn this radical quantum computing concept into a practical device using components that underpin all modern computing," said mark hoffman, unsw's dean of engineering.
"our team now has a blueprint for scaling that up dramatically.
"we've been testing elements of this design in the lab, with very positive results.
we just need to keep building on that - which is still a hell of a challenge, but the groundwork is there, and it's very encouraging.
it will still take great engineering to bring quantum computing to commercial reality, but clearly the work we see from this extraordinary team at cqc2t puts australia in the driver's seat," he added.
the unsw team has struck a $83-million aus deal between unsw, telstra, commonwealth bank and the australian and new south wales governments to develop a 10-qubit prototype silicon quantum integrated circuit by 2022, marking the first step in building the world's first quantum computer in silicon.
for more quantum computing news, read about this major leap toward a global quantum internet.
source: university of new south wales
with companies like google, microsoft, and ibm all racing to create the world's first practical quantum computer, scientists worldwide are exploring the potential materials that could be used to build them.
now, associate professor yang hyunsoo and his team from the department of electrical and computer engineering at the national university of singapore (nus) faculty of engineering have demonstrated a new method which could be used to bring quantum computing closer to reality.
"the nus team, together with our collaborators from rutgers, the state university of new jersey in the united states and rmit university in australia, showed a practical way to observe and examine the quantum effects of electrons in topological insulators and heavy metals which could later pave the way for the development of advanced quantum computing components and devices," explained assoc prof yang.
the findings of the study were published in the scientific journal nature communications in june 2018.
the advantage of quantum computers
quantum computers are still in the early stages of development but are already displaying computing speeds millions of times faster than traditional technologies.
as such, it is predicted that when quantum computing becomes more readily available, it will be able to answer some of the world's toughest questions in everything from finance to physics.
this remarkable processing power is made possible by the radical way that quantum computers operate -- using light rather than electricity.
classical computers push electrons through devices which code information into binary states of ones and zeros.
in contrast, quantum computers use laser light to interact with electrons in materials to measure the phenomenon of electron "spin."
these spinning electron states replace the ones and zeros used as the basis for traditional computers, and because they can exist in many spin states simultaneously, this allows for much more complex computing to be performed.
however, harnessing information based on the interactions of light and electrons is easier said than done.
these interactions are incredibly complex and like anything in the quantum world there is a degree of uncertainty when trying to predict behaviour.
as such, a reliable and practical way to observe these quantum effects has been sought-after in recent research to help in the discovery of more advanced quantum computing devices.
visualising quantum spin effects
the real breakthrough from the scientists at nus was the ability to "see" for the first time particular spin phenomena in topological insulators and metals using a scanning photovoltage microscope.
topological insulators are electronic materials that are insulating in their interior but support conducting states on their surface, thus enabling electrons to flow along the surface of the material.
assoc prof yang and his team examined platinum metal as well as topological insulators bi2se3 and bisbtese2.
an applied electrical current influenced the electron spin at the quantum level for all of these materials and the scientists were able to directly visualise this change using polarised light from the microscope.
additionally, unlike other observational techniques, the innovative experimental setup meant that the results could be gathered at room temperature, making this a practical method of visualisation which is applicable to many other materials.
mr liu yang, who is a phd student with the department and first author of the study, said, "our method can be used as a powerful and universal tool to detect the spin accumulations in various materials systems.
this means that developing better devices for quantum computers will become easier now that these phenomena can be directly observed in this way."
next steps
moving forward, assoc prof yang and his team are planning to test their new method on more novel materials with novel spin properties.
the team hopes to work with industry partners to further explore the various applications of this unique technique, with a focus on developing the devices used in future quantum computers.
story source:
materials provided by national university of singapore.
note: content may be edited for style and length.
on september 20, the financial times reported that a google research paper temporarily posted online said google's quantum computer has reached "quantum supremacy," a threshold at which quantum computers are theorized to be capable of solving problems, which traditional computers would not (practically) be able to solve.
if true, this represents a major milestone in the advancement of quantum computing.
according to the financial times, the report said that google's quantum computer performed a computation in just over 3 minutes that would take 10,000 years to perform on ibm summit, the world's top-ranking supercomputer.
the paper indicated, "to our knowledge, this experiment marks the first computation that can only be performed on a quantum processor."
the specific computation in question is at present unclear, though if google has truly reached quantum supremacy, this would necessarily be a milestone worthy of celebration.
instead, google quietly removed the research paper and declined to comment on the report to techrepublic sister site cnet.
industry reaction to the news has largely been sceptical, as expectations that google's advancement is either overblown, or not applicable to practical business use of quantum computers.
"the experiment and the 'supremacy' term will be misunderstood by nearly all," said dario gil, director of ibm research, in a written statement.
"quantum computers are not 'supreme' against classical computers because of a laboratory experiment designed to essentially (and almost certainly exclusively) implement one very specific quantum sampling procedure with no practical applications.
in fact, quantum computers will never reign 'supreme' over classical computers, but will rather work in concert with them, since each have their unique strengths."
"for quantum to positively impact society, the task ahead is to continue to build and make widely accessible truly programmable quantum computing systems that can implement, reproducibly and reliably, a broad array of quantum algorithms and programs," gil said.
"this is the only path forward for practical solutions to be realized in quantum computers.
only then will we get to the era of quantum advantage, when we will get to use "quantum + classical" systems in concert to accelerate discovery in science and to create commercial value in business.
that goal, no matter current claims, has not been realized."
gil said that over-hyping "quantum supremacy" could lead to a quantum winter, similar to the "ai winter" of reduced funding and interest in artificial intelligence research, a concern also raised by gartner research vice president matthew brisse.
"if [the research paper] is validated, and we can actually show quantum supremacy, that's a huge leap in the quantum computing industry," brisse said.
"i've taken over 300 calls this to date, nobody is categorically super concerned about 'how does it work?
', it is all about 'how do i turn this into competitive advantage?'"
brisse said.
intel's reaction to the news was moderately warmer.
"google's recent update on the achievement of quantum supremacy is a notable mile marker as we continue to advance the potential of quantum computing.
achieving a commercially viable quantum computer will require advancements across a number of pillars of the technology stack," said jim clarke, director of quantum hardware at intel labs.
"we along with the industry are working to quickly advance all of those areas to realize the true potential of quantum computing.
and while development is still at mile one of the marathon, we strongly believe in the potential of this technology."
for more on quantum computing, check out "aliro aims to make quantum computers usable by traditional programmers" and "why post-quantum encryption will be critical to protect current classical computers" at techrepublic.
also see
after decades of miniaturization, the electronic components we've relied on for computers and modern technologies are now starting to reach fundamental limits.
faced with this challenge, engineers and scientists around the world are turning toward a radically new paradigm: quantum information technologies.
quantum technology, which harnesses the strange rules that govern particles at the atomic level, is normally thought of as much too delicate to coexist with the electronics we use every day in phones, laptops and cars.
however, scientists with the university of chicago's pritzker school of molecular engineering announced a significant breakthrough: quantum states can be integrated and controlled in commonly used electronic devices made from silicon carbide.
"the ability to create and control high-performance quantum bits in commercial electronics was a surprise," said lead investigator david awschalom, the liew family professor in molecular engineering at uchicago and a pioneer in quantum technology.
"these discoveries have changed the way we think about developing quantum technologies—perhaps we can find a way to use today's electronics to build quantum devices."
in two papers published in science and science advances, awschalom's group demonstrated they could electrically control quantum states embedded in silicon carbide.
the breakthrough could offer a means to more easily design and build quantum electronics—in contrast to using exotic materials scientists usually need to use for quantum experiments, such as superconducting metals, levitated atoms or diamonds.
these quantum states in silicon carbide have the added benefit of emitting single particles of light with a wavelength near the telecommunications band.
"this makes them well suited to long-distance transmission through the same fiber-optic network that already transports 90 percent of all international data worldwide," said awschalom, senior scientist at argonne national laboratory and director of the chicago quantum exchange.
moreover, these light particles can gain exciting new properties when combined with existing electronics.
for example, in the science advances paper, the team was able to create what awschalom called a "quantum fm radio;" in the same way music is transmitted to your car radio, quantum information can be sent over extremely long distances.
"all the theory suggests that in order to achieve good quantum control in a material, it should be pure and free of fluctuating fields," said graduate student kevin miao, first author on the paper.
"our results suggest that with proper design, a device can not only mitigate those impurities, but also create additional forms of control that previously were not possible."
in the science paper, they describe a second breakthrough that addresses a very common problem in quantum technology: noise.
"impurities are common in all semiconductor devices, and at the quantum level, these impurities can scramble the quantum information by creating a noisy electrical environment," said graduate student chris anderson, a co-first author on the paper.
"this is a near-universal problem for quantum technologies."
but, by using one of the basic elements of electronics—the diode, a one-way switch for electrons—the team discovered another unexpected result: the quantum signal suddenly became free of noise and was almost perfectly stable.
"in our experiments we need to use lasers, which unfortunately jostle the electrons around.
it's like a game of musical chairs with electrons; when the light goes out everything stops, but in a different configuration," said graduate student alexandre bourassa, the other co-first author on the paper.
"the problem is that this random configuration of electrons affects our quantum state.
but we found that applying electric fields removes the electrons from the system and makes it much more stable."
by integrating the strange physics of quantum mechanics with well-developed classical semiconductor technology, awschalom and his group are paving the way for the coming quantum technology revolution.
"this work brings us one step closer to the realization of systems capable of storing and distributing quantum information across the world's fiber-optic networks," awschalom said.
"such quantum networks would bring about a novel class of technologies allowing for the creation of unhackable communication channels, the teleportation of single electron states and the realization of a quantum internet."
more information: christopher p. anderson et al.
electrical and optical control of single spins integrated in scalable semiconductor devices, science (2019).
doi: 10.1126/science.aax9406
kevin c. miao et al.
electrically driven optical interferometry with spins in silicon carbide, science advances (2019).
doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aay0527
provided by university of chicago
quantum engineers from unsw sydney have created artificial atoms in silicon chips that offer improved stability for quantum computing.
in a paper published today in nature communications, unsw quantum computing researchers describe how they created artificial atoms in a silicon 'quantum dot', a tiny space in a quantum circuit where electrons are used as qubits (or quantum bits), the basic units of quantum information.
scientia professor andrew dzurak explains that unlike a real atom, an artificial atom has no nucleus, but it still has shells of electrons whizzing around the centre of the device, rather than around the atom's nucleus.
"the idea of creating artificial atoms using electrons is not new, in fact it was first proposed theoretically in the 1930s and then experimentally demonstrated in the 1990s—although not in silicon.
we first made a rudimentary version of it in silicon back in 2013," says professor dzurak, who is an arc laureate fellow and is also director of the australian national fabrication facility at unsw, where the quantum dot device was manufactured.
"but what really excites us about our latest research is that artificial atoms with a higher number of electrons turn out to be much more robust qubits than previously thought possible, meaning they can be reliably used for calculations in quantum computers.
this is significant because qubits based on just one electron can be very unreliable."
chemistry 101
professor dzurak likens the different types of artificial atoms his team has created to a kind of periodic table for quantum bits, which he says is apt given that 2019—when this ground-breaking work was carried out—was the international year of the periodic table.
"if you think back to your high school science class, you may remember a dusty chart hanging on the wall that listed all the known elements in the order of how many electrons they had, starting with hydrogen with one electron, helium with two, lithium with three and so on.
"you may even remember that as each atom gets heavier, with more and more electrons, they organise into different levels of orbit, known as 'shells'.
"it turns out that when we create artificial atoms in our quantum circuits, they also have well organised and predictable shells of electrons, just like natural atoms in the periodic table do."
connect the dots
professor dzurak and his team from unsw's school of electrical engineering—including ph.d. student ross leon who is also lead author in the research, and dr. andre saraiva—configured a quantum device in silicon to test the stability of electrons in artificial atoms.
they applied a voltage to the silicon via a metal surface 'gate' electrode to attract spare electrons from the silicon to form the quantum dot, an infinitesimally small space of only around 10 nanometres in diameter.
"as we slowly increased the voltage, we would draw in new electrons, one after another, to form an artificial atom in our quantum dot," says dr. saraiva, who led the theoretical analysis of the results.
"in a real atom, you have a positive charge in the middle, being the nucleus, and then the negatively charged electrons are held around it in three dimensional orbits.
in our case, rather than the positive nucleus, the positive charge comes from the gate electrode which is separated from the silicon by an insulating barrier of silicon oxide, and then the electrons are suspended underneath it, each orbiting around the centre of the quantum dot.
but rather than forming a sphere, they are arranged flat, in a disc."
mr leon, who ran the experiments, says the researchers were interested in what happened when an extra electron began to populate a new outer shell.
in the periodic table, the elements with just one electron in their outer shells include hydrogen and the metals lithium, sodium and potassium.
"when we create the equivalent of hydrogen, lithium and sodium in the quantum dot, we are basically able to use that lone electron on the outer shell as a qubit," ross says.
"up until now, imperfections in silicon devices at the atomic level have disrupted the way qubits behave, leading to unreliable operation and errors.
but it seems that the extra electrons in the inner shells act like a 'primer' on the imperfect surface of the quantum dot, smoothing things out and giving stability to the electron in the outer shell."
watch the spin
achieving stability and control of electrons is a crucial step towards silicon-based quantum computers becoming a reality.
where a classical computer uses 'bits' of information represented by either a 0 or a 1, the qubits in a quantum computer can store values of 0 and 1 simultaneously.
this enables a quantum computer to carry out calculations in parallel, rather than one after another as a conventional computer would.
the data processing power of a quantum computer then increases exponentially with the number of qubits it has available.
it is the spin of an electron that we use to encode the value of the qubit, explains professor dzurak.
"spin is a quantum mechanical property.
an electron acts like a tiny magnet and depending on which way it spins its north pole can either point up or down, corresponding to a 1 or a 0.
"when the electrons in either a real atom, or our artificial atoms, form a complete shell, they align their poles in opposite directions so that the total spin of the system is zero, making them useless as a qubit.
but when we add one more electron to start a new shell, this extra electron has a spin that we can now use as a qubit again.
"our new work shows that we can control the spin of electrons in the outer shells of these artificial atoms to give us reliable and stable qubits.
"this is really important because it means we can now work with much less fragile qubits.
one electron is a very fragile thing.
however an artificial atom with 5 electrons, or 13 electrons, is much more robust."
the silicon advantage
professor dzurak's group was the first in the world to demonstrate quantum logic between two qubits in silicon devices in 2015, and has also published a design for a full-scale quantum computer chip architecture based on cmos technology, which is the same technology used to manufacture all modern-day computer chips.
"by using silicon cmos technology we can significantly reduce the development time of quantum computers with the millions of qubits that will be needed to solve problems of global significance, such as the design of new medicines, or new chemical catalysts to reduce energy consumption", says professor dzurak.
in a continuation of this latest breakthrough, the group will explore how the rules of chemical bonding apply to these new artificial atoms, to create 'artificial molecules'.
these will be used to create improved multi-qubit logic gates needed for the realisation of a large-scale silicon quantum computer.
provided by university of new south wales
physicists at uc santa barbara have succeeded in combining laser light with trapped electrons to detect and control the electrons' fragile quantum state without erasing it.
this is an important step toward using quantum physics to expand computing power and to communicate over long distances without the possibility of eavesdropping.
the work appears online today at science express.
the research, led by david awschalom, professor of physics, electrical and computer engineering, and director of ucsb's center for spintronics and quantum computation, and graduate student bob buckley, exploits an unusual property of the microscopic quantum world: the ability to combine things that are very different.
using electrons trapped in a single atom-sized defect within a thin crystal of diamond, combined with laser light of precisely the right color, the scientists showed that it was possible to briefly form a mixture of light and matter.
after forming this light-matter mixture, they were able to use measurements of the light to determine the state of the electrons.
likewise, by separately examining the electrons, they showed that the electron configuration was not destroyed by the light.
instead, it was modified -- a dramatic demonstration of control over quantum states using light.
"manipulating the quantum state of a single electron in a semiconductor without destroying the information represents an extremely exciting scientific development with potential technological impact," said awschalom.
preserving quantum states is a major obstacle in the nascent field of quantum computing.
one benefit of quantum information is that it can never be copied, unlike information transferred between today's computers, providing a measure of security that is safeguarded by fundamental laws of nature.
the ability to measure a quantum state without destroying it is an important step in the development of technologies that harness the advantages of the quantum world.
buckley, putting this research in perspective, said: "diamond may someday become for a quantum computer what silicon is for digital computers today -- the building blocks of logic, memory, and communication.
our experiment provides a new tool to make that happen. "
provided by university of california -- santa barbara
the one thing everyone knows about quantum mechanics is its legendary weirdness, in which the basic tenets of the world it describes seem alien to the world we live in.
superposition, where things can be in two states simultaneously, a switch both on and off, a cat both dead and alive.
or entanglement, what einstein called "spooky action-at-distance" in which objects are invisibly linked, even when separated by huge distances.
but weird or not, quantum theory is approaching a century old and has found many applications in daily life.
as john von neumann once said: "you don't understand quantum mechanics, you just get used to it."
much of electronics is based on quantum physics, and the application of quantum theory to computing could open up huge possibilities for the complex calculations and data processing we see today.
imagine a computer processor able to harness super-position, to calculate the result of an arbitrarily large number of permutations of a complex problem simultaneously.
imagine how entanglement could be used to allow systems on different sides of the world to be linked and their efforts combined, despite their physical separation.
quantum computing has immense potential, making light work of some of the most difficult tasks, such as simulating the body's response to drugs, predicting weather patterns, or analysing big datasets.
such processing possibilities are needed.
the first transistors could only just be held in the hand, while today they measure just 14 nm – 500 times smaller than a red blood cell.
this relentless shrinking, predicted by intel founder gordon moore as moore's law, has held true for 50 years, but cannot hold indefinitely.
silicon can only be shrunk so far, and if we are to continue benefiting from the performance gains we have become used to, we need a different approach.
quantum fabrication
advances in semiconductor fabrication have made it possible to mass-produce quantum-scale semiconductors – electronic circuits that exhibit quantum effects such as super-position and entanglement.
the image, captured at the atomic scale, shows a cross-section through one potential candidate for the building blocks of a quantum computer, a semiconductor nano-ring.
electrons trapped in these rings exhibit the strange properties of quantum mechanics, and semiconductor fabrication processes are poised to integrate these elements required to build a quantum computer.
while we may be able to construct a quantum computer using structures like these, there are still major challenges involved.
in a classical computer processor a huge number of transistors interact conditionally and predictably with one another.
but quantum behaviour is highly fragile; for example, under quantum physics even measuring the state of the system such as checking whether the switch is on or off, actually changes what is being observed.
conducting an orchestra of quantum systems to produce useful output that couldn't easily by handled by a classical computer is extremely difficult.
but there have been huge investments: the uk government announced £270m … quantum technologies in 2014 for example, and the likes of google, nasa and lockheed martin are also working in the field.
it's difficult to predict the pace of progress, but a useful quantum computer could be ten years away.
the basic element of quantum computing is known as a qubit, the quantum equivalent to the bits used in traditional computers.
to date, scientists have harnessed quantum systems to represent qubits in many different ways, ranging from defects in diamonds, to semiconductor nano-structures or tiny superconducting circuits.
each of these has is own advantages and disadvantages, but none yet has met all the requirements for a quantum computer, known as the divincenzo criteria.
the most impressive progress has come from d-wave systems, a firm that has managed to pack hundreds of qubits on to a small chip similar in appearance to a traditional processor.
quantum secrets
the benefits of harnessing quantum technologies aren't limited to computing, however.
whether or not quantum computing will extend or augment digital computing, the same quantum effects can be harnessed for other means.
the most mature example is quantum communications.
quantum physics has been proposed as a means to prevent forgery of valuable objects, such as a banknote or diamond, as illustrated in the image below.
here, the unusual negative rules embedded within quantum physics prove useful; perfect copies of unknown states cannot be made and measurements change the systems they are measuring.
these two limitations are combined in this quantum anti-counterfeiting scheme, making it impossible to copy the identity of the object they are stored in.
the concept of quantum money is, unfortunately, highly impractical, but the same idea has been successfully extended to communications.
the idea is straightforward: the act of measuring quantum super-position states alters what you try to measure, so it's possible to detect the presence of an eavesdropper making such measurements.
with the correct protocol, such as bb84, it is possible to communicate privately, with that privacy guaranteed by fundamental laws of physics.
quantum communication systems are commercially available today from firms such as toshiba and id quantique.
while the implementation is clunky and expensive now it will become more streamlined and miniaturised, just as transistors have miniaturised over the last 60 years.
improvements to nanoscale fabrication techniques will greatly accelerate the development of quantum-based technologies.
and while useful quantum computing still appears to be some way off, it's future is very exciting indeed.
source: the conversation
this story is published courtesy of the conversation (under creative commons-attribution/no derivatives).
ibm research has announced that for the first time ever it is making quantum computing available to members of the public, who can access and run experiments on ibm’s quantum processor.
ibm scientists have built a quantum processor that users can access through a first-of-a-kind quantum computing platform delivered via the ibm cloud onto any desktop or mobile device.
ibm believes quantum computing is the future of computing and has the potential to solve certain problems that are impossible to solve on today’s supercomputers.
the cloud-enabled quantum computing platform, called ibm quantum experience, will allow users to run algorithms and experiments on ibm’s quantum processor, work with the individual quantum bits (qubits), and explore tutorials and simulations around what might be possible with quantum computing.
the quantum processor is composed of five superconducting qubits and is housed at the ibm t.j. watson research center in new york.
the five-qubit processor represents the latest advancement in ibm’s quantum architecture that can scale to larger quantum systems.
it is the leading approach towards building a universal quantum computer.
a universal quantum computer can be programmed to perform any computing task and will be exponentially faster than classical computers for a number of important applications for science and business.
a universal quantum computer does not exist today, but ibm envisions medium-sized quantum processors of 50-100 qubits to be possible in the next decade.
with a quantum computer built of just 50 qubits, none of today’s top500 supercomputers could successfully emulate it, reflecting the tremendous potential of this technology.
the community of quantum computer scientists and theorists is working to harness this power, and applications in optimisation and chemistry will likely be the first to demonstrate quantum speed-up.
“quantum computers are very different from today’s computers, not only in what they look like and are made of, but more importantly in what they can do.
quantum computing is becoming a reality and it will extend computation far beyond what is imaginable with today’s computers,” said arvind krishna, senior vice president and director, ibm research.
“this moment represents the birth of quantum cloud computing.
by giving hands-on access to ibm’s experimental quantum systems, the ibm quantum experience will make it easier for researchers and the scientific community to accelerate innovations in the quantum field, and help discover new applications for this technology.”
with moore’s law running out of steam, quantum computing will be among the technologies that could usher in a new era of innovation across industries.
this leap forward in computing could lead to the discovery of new pharmaceutical drugs and completely safeguard cloud computing systems.
it could also unlock new facets of artificial intelligence (which could lead to future, more powerful watson technologies), develop new materials science to transform industries, and search large volumes of big data.
quantum information is very fragile and needs to be protected from any errors that can result from heat and electromagnetic radiation.
signals are sent in and out of a cryogenic dilution refrigerator to measure operations on the quantum processor.
the ibm team has made a number of robust engineering advances both at the device level and in the electronic controls to give ibm quantum experience users unprecedented and reliably high-quality performance in this five-qubit processor.
coupled with software expertise from the ibm research ecosystem, the team has built a dynamic user interface on the ibm cloud platform that allows users to easily connect to the quantum hardware via the cloud.
the team sees the introduction to the public of this complete quantum computing framework as just the start of a new user community, which embraces the quantum world and how it works.
in the future, users will have the opportunity to contribute and review their results in the community hosted on the ibm quantum experience and ibm scientists will be directly engaged to offer more research and insights on new advances.
ibm plans to add more qubits and different processor arrangements to the ibm quantum experience over time, so users can expand their experiments and help uncover new applications for the technology.
we live in a world where classical physics defines our experiences and our intuition, and ultimately how we process information.
however, nature at the atomic level is governed by a different set of rules known as quantum mechanics.
it is beyond the reach of classical computers to solve problems that exist in nature in which quantum mechanics plays a role, for example, understanding how molecules behave.
to overcome this, in 1981, richard feynman proposed to build computers based on the laws of quantum mechanics.
over three decades later, ibm is helping to make this a reality.
quantum computing works fundamentally differently from today’s computers.
a classical computer makes use of bits to process information, where each bit represents either a one or a zero.
in contrast, a qubit can represent a one, a zero, or both at once, which is known as superposition.
this property along with other quantum effects enable quantum computers to perform certain calculations vastly faster than is possible with classical computers.
most of today’s quantum computing research in academia and industry is focused on building a universal quantum computer.
the major challenges include creating qubits of high quality and packaging them together in a scalable way, so they can perform complex calculations in a controllable way.
ibm employs superconducting qubits that are made with superconducting metals on a silicon chip and can be designed and manufactured using standard silicon fabrication techniques.
last year, ibm scientists demonstrated critical breakthroughs to detect quantum errors by combining superconducting qubits in latticed arrangements, and whose quantum circuit design is the only physical architecture that can scale to larger dimensions.
now, ibm scientists have achieved a further advance by combining five qubits in the lattice architecture, which demonstrates a key operation known as a parity measurement – the basis of many quantum error correction protocols.
the road towards universal quantum computing hinges upon the achievement of quantum error correction, and the ibm team has taken another important step down this challenging path.
there has been tremendous progress and interest in the field of quantum of computing in recent years.
by giving users access to the ibm quantum experience, it will help businesses and organizations begin to understand the technology’s potential, for universities to grow their teaching programs in quantum computing and related subjects, and for students to become aware of promising new career paths.
“it is a beautiful challenge to pursue the path to build the first universal quantum computer, but it requires us to change how we think about the world.
access to early quantum computing prototypes will be key in imagining and developing future applications,” said dario gil, vice president of science and solutions, ibm research.
“if you want to understand what a true quantum computer will do for you and how it works, this is the place to do it.
you won’t experience it anywhere else.”
ibm’s quantum computing platform is a core initiative within the newly formed ibm research frontiers institute.
the frontiers institute is a consortium that develops and shares ground-breaking computing technologies to spur world-changing innovations.
companies from diverse industries can leverage ibm’s research talent and cutting-edge infrastructure to explore what the future of quantum computing may mean for their organization and business.
founding members of the frontiers institute include samsung, jsr, and honda.
leti, an institute of cea, has created a quantum integrated circuit that demonstrates the possibility of integrating conventional electronic devices and elements with quantum dots on a cmos chip.
the chip, fabricated on 28nm fd-soi process, integrates analog and digital functions (multiplexer, buffer, signal amplifier, oscillator, level converter) that represent future instrumentation needs for the quantum accelerator envisioned in cea-leti’s quantum initiative.
beyond the need to obtain reliable, entangled and coherent quantum bits, or qubits, on silicon, the goal of this work is ultimately to produce electronics capable of routing numerous signals to address a matrix of several hundred qubits.
these results also demonstrate cea-leti’s know-how in cryogenic instrumentation in fd-soi technology and can also be used for other non-silicon quantum devices such as superconducting qubits.
the results were presented in a paper, ‘a 110mk 295μw 28nm fd-soi cmos quantum integrated circuit with a 2.8ghz excitation and na current sensing of an on-chip double quantum dot’, on feb. 18th at isscc 2020 in san francisco.
“to reach quantum supremacy, quantum computers need >50 logical qubits with <mv accurate biasing, ghz-range signal handling, and μs readout of thousands of physical qubits at sub-kelvin temperatures,” the paper reported.
“silicon-based qubits are a promising approach to scale the qubit number owing to their low footprint (100 nm) and gaining from the cmos industrial background to reach maturity.
“moreover, the quantum silicon choice allows the ic community to integrate large-scale qubit-control electronics directly nearby the quantum silicon core, thus drastically reducing the wire-connection number and qubit-addressing fanout, meanwhile increasing the operation bandwidth for error correction and the spin-readout sensitivity.”
loïck le guevel, a lead author of the paper, explained that the quantum integrated circuit is a proof-of-concept circuit merging microelectronics benchmarks and quantum dots operating at sub-kelvin temperature within a limited power budget.
“it uses all elements required to properly design high-spec state-of-the-art circuits, such as passive elements, resistors and capacitors, transistors for digital operation up to 7ghz, and transistors for analog operation up to 3ghz,” he said.
“on top of that, we were able to design a double quantum dot in the same semiconductor layer as transistors using a standard fabrication flow.
this realization emphasizes that fd-soi could one day allow circuit designers to use qubit arrays embedded in ip blocks with classic electronics to build custom-made, large-scale quantum silicon processors.”
le guevel is a ph.d. student supervised by gaël pillonnet and louis jansen in the quantum silicon grenoble research group led by maud vinet.
in addition to demonstrating a highly sensitive analog current read-out operating at 110mk, 40x lower than competing technologies, within the limited power budget, the researchers demonstrated the possibility of having ghz digital signal generation, and ghz signal analog manipulation.
a quantum dot structure, very similar to the first realization of a spin qubit on a silicon 300mm industrial wafer by the quantum silicon grenoble group, also was fabricated on the same semiconductor layer using industrial-grade design software and common foundry design rules.
despite the close proximity (<1 micrometer) of dissipating high-speed electronics and a sensitive quantum-dot device, quantum effects were preserved and open a path toward an industrially made quantum dot device that will benefit from a higher reproducibility/yield of the silicon cmos technology.
in the medium-term, the quantum community is focused on noisy intermediate-scale quantum technology (nisq) that has the potential to outperform classical supercalculators in some specific tasks, such as path optimization, quantum deep learning, neural networks, ai and recommendation systems.
this first co-integration together with the recently published performance on silicon-based qubits confirms that silicon is a serious contender, as it allows fast operations while maintain competitive fidelity with controlled process reproducibility on a scalable footprint.
quantum computing has the potential to revolutionize technology, medicine, and science by providing faster and more efficient processors, sensors, and communication devices.
but transferring information and correcting errors within a quantum system remains a challenge to making effective quantum computers.
in a paper in the journal nature, researchers from purdue university and the university of rochester, including john nichol, an assistant professor of physics, and rochester phd students yadav p. kandel and haifeng qiao, demonstrate their method of relaying information by transferring the state of electrons.
the research brings scientists one step closer to creating fully functional quantum computers and is the latest example of rochester's initiative to better understand quantum behavior and develop novel quantum systems.
the university recently received a $4 million grant from the department of energy to explore quantum materials.
quantum computers
a quantum computer operates on the principles of quantum mechanics, a unique set of rules that govern at the extremely small scale of atoms and subatomic particles.
when dealing with particles at these scales, many of the rules that govern classical physics no longer apply and quantum effects emerge; a quantum computer is able to perform complex calculations, factor extremely large numbers, and simulate the behaviors of atoms and particles at levels that classical computers cannot.
quantum computers have the potential to provide more insight into principles of physics and chemistry by simulating the behavior of matter at unusual conditions at the molecular level.
these simulations could be useful in developing new energy sources and studying the conditions of planets and galaxies or comparing compounds that could lead to new drug therapies.
"you and i are quantum systems.
the particles in our body obey quantum physics.
but, if you try to compute what happens with all of the atoms in our body, you cannot do it on a regular computer," nichol says.
"a quantum computer could easily do this."
quantum computers could also open doors for faster database searches and cryptography.
"it turns out that almost all of modern cryptography is based on the extreme difficulty for regular computers to factor large numbers," nichol says.
"quantum computers can easily factor large numbers and break encryption schemes, so you can imagine why lots of governments are interested in this."
bits vs. qubits
a regular computer consists of billions of transistors, called bits.
quantum computers, on the other hand, are based on quantum bits, also known as qubits, which can be made from a single electron.
unlike ordinary transistors, which can be either "0" or "1," qubits can be both "0" and "1" at the same time.
the ability for individual qubits to occupy these "superposition states," where they are simultaneously in multiple states, underlies the great potential of quantum computers.
just like ordinary computers, however, quantum computers need a way to transfer information between qubits, and this presents a major experimental challenge.
"a quantum computer needs to have many qubits, and they're really difficult to make and operate," nichol says.
"the state-of-the art right now is doing something with only a few qubits, so we're still a long ways away from realizing the full potential of quantum computers."
all computers, including both regular and quantum computers and devices like smart phones, also have to perform error correction.
a regular computer contains copies of bits so if one of the bits goes bad, "the rest are just going to take a majority vote" and fix the error.
however, quantum bits cannot be copied, nichol says, "so you have to be very clever about how you correct for errors.
what we're doing here is one step in that direction."
manipulating electrons
quantum error correction requires that individual qubits interact with many other qubits.
this can be difficult because an individual electron is like a bar magnet with a north pole and a south pole that can point either up or down.
the direction of the pole -- whether the north pole is pointing up or down, for instance -- is known as the electron's magnetic moment or quantum state.
if certain kinds of particles have the same magnetic moment, they cannot be in the same place at the same time.
that is, two electrons in the same quantum state cannot sit on top of each other.
"this is one of the main reasons something like a penny, which is made out of metal, doesn't collapse on itself," nichol says.
"the electrons are pushing themselves apart because they cannot be in the same place at the same time."
if two electrons are in opposite states, they can sit on top of each other.
a surprising consequence of this is that if the electrons are close enough, their states will swap back and forth in time.
"if you have one electron that's up and another electron that's down and you push them together for just the right amount of time, they will swap," nichol says.
"they did not switch places, but their states switched."
to force this phenomenon, nichol and his colleagues cooled down a semiconductor chip to extremely low temperatures.
using quantum dots -- nanoscale semiconductors -- they trapped four electrons in a row, then moved the electrons so they came in contact and their states switched.
"there's an easy way to switch the state between two neighboring electrons, but doing it over long distances -- in our case, it's four electrons -- requires a lot of control and technical skill," nichol says.
"our research shows this is now a viable approach to send information over long distances."
a first step
transmitting the state of an electron back and forth across an array of qubits, without moving the position of electrons, provides a striking example of the possibilities allowed by quantum physics for information science.
"this experiment demonstrates that information in quantum states can be transferred without actually transferring the individual electron spins down the chain," says michael manfra, a professor of physics and astronomy at purdue university.
"it is an important step for showing how information can be transmitted quantum-mechanically -- in manners quite different than our classical intuition would lead us to believe."
nichol likens this to the steps that led from the first computing devices to today's computers.
that said, will we all someday have quantum computers to replace our desktop computers?
"if you had asked that question of ibm in the 1960s, they probably would've said no, there's no way that's going to happen," nichol says.
"that's my reaction now.
but, who knows?"
physicists at mit and harvard university have demonstrated a new way to manipulate quantum bits of matter.
in a paper published today in the journal nature, they report using a system of finely tuned lasers to first trap and then tweak the interactions of 51 individual atoms, or quantum bits.
the team's results represent one of the largest arrays of quantum bits, known as qubits, that scientists have been able to individually control.
in the same issue of nature, a team from the university of maryland reports a similarly sized system using trapped ions as quantum bits.
in the mit-harvard approach, the researchers generated a chain of 51 atoms and programmed them to undergo a quantum phase transition, in which every other atom in the chain was excited.
the pattern resembles a state of magnetism known as an antiferromagnet, in which the spin of every other atom or molecule is aligned.
the team describes the 51-atom array as not quite a generic quantum computer, which theoretically should be able to solve any computation problem posed to it, but a "quantum simulator"—a system of quantum bits that can be designed to simulate a specific problem or solve for a particular equation, much faster than the fastest classical computer.
for instance, the team can reconfigure the pattern of atoms to simulate and study new states of matter and quantum phenomena such as entanglement.
the new quantum simulator could also be the basis for solving optimization problems such as the traveling salesman problem, in which a theoretical salesman must figure out the shortest path to take in order to visit a given list of cities.
slight variations of this problem appear in many other areas of research, such as dna sequencing, moving an automated soldering tip to many soldering points, or routing packets of data through processing nodes.
"this problem is exponentially hard for a classical computer, meaning it could solve this for a certain number of cities, but if i wanted to add more cities, it would get much harder, very quickly," says study co-author vladan vuleti?, the lester wolfe professor of physics at mit.
"for this kind of problem, you don't need a quantum computer.
a simulator is good enough to simulate the correct system.
so we think these optimization algorithms are the most straightforward tasks to achieve."
the work was performed in collaboration with harvard professors mikhail lukin and markus greiner; mit visiting scientist sylvain schwartz is also a co-author.
separate but interacting
quantum computers are largely theoretical devices that could potentially carry out immensely complicated computations in a fraction of the time that it would take for the world's most powerful classical computer.
they would do so through qubits—data processing units which, unlike the binary bits of classical computers, can be simultaneously in a position of 0 and 1.
this quantum property of superposition allows a single qubit to carry out two separate streams of computation simultaneously.
adding additional qubits to a system can exponentially speed up a computer's calculations.
but major roadblocks have prevented scientists from realizing a fully operational quantum computer.
one such challenge: how to get qubits to interact with each other while not engaging with their surrounding environment.
"we know things turn classical very easily when they interact with the environment, so you need [qubits] to be super isolated," says vuleti?, who is a member of the research laboratory of electronics and the mit-harvard center for ultracold atoms.
"on the other hand, they need to strongly interact with another qubit."
some groups are building quantum systems with ions, or charged atoms, as qubits.
they trap or isolate the ions from the rest of the environment using electric fields; once trapped, the ions strongly interact with each other.
but many of these interactions are strongly repelling, like magnets of similar orientation, and are therefore difficult to control, particularly in systems with many ions.
other researchers are experimenting with superconducting qubits—artificial atoms fabricated to behave in a quantum fashion.
but vuleti?
says such manufactured qubits have their disadvantages compared with those based on actual atoms.
"by definition, every atom is the same as every other atom of the same species," vuleti?
says.
"but when you build them by hand, then you have fabrication influences, such as slightly different transition frequencies, couplings, et cetera."
setting the trap
vuleti?
and his colleagues came up with a third approach to building a quantum system, using neutral atoms—atoms that hold no electrical charge—as qubits.
unlike ions, neutral atoms do not repel each other, and they have inherently identical properties, unlike fabricated superconducting qubits.
in previous work, the group devised a way to trap individual atoms, by using a laser beam to first cool a cloud of rubidium atoms to close to absolute zero temperatures, slowing their motion to a near standstill.
they then employ a second laser, split into more than 100 beams, to trap and hold individual atoms in place.
they are able to image the cloud to see which laser beams have trapped an atom, and can switch off certain beams to discard those traps without an atom.
they then rearrange all the traps with atoms, to create an ordered, defect-free array of qubits.
with this technique, the researchers have been able to build a quantum chain of 51 atoms, all trapped at their ground state, or lowest energy level.
in their new paper, the team reports going a step further, to control the interactions of these 51 trapped atoms, a necessary step toward manipulating individual qubits.
to do so, they temporarily turned off the laser frequencies that originally trapped the atoms, allowing the quantum system to naturally evolve.
they then exposed the evolving quantum system to a third laser beam to try and excite the atoms into what is known as a rydberg state—a state in which one of an atom's electrons is excited to a very high energy compared with the rest of the atom's electrons.
finally, they turned the atom-trapping laser beams back on to detect the final states of the individual atoms.
"if all the atoms start in the ground state, it turns out when we try to put all the atoms in this excited state, the state that emerges is one where every second atom is excited," vuleti?
says.
"so the atoms make a quantum phase transition to something similar to an antiferromagnet."
the transition takes place only in every other atom due to the fact that atoms in rydberg states interact very strongly with each other, and it would take much more energy to excite two neighboring atoms to rydberg states than the laser can provide.
vuleti?
says the researchers can change the interactions between atoms by changing the arrangement of trapped atoms, as well as the frequency or color of the atom-exciting laser beam.
what's more, the system may be easily expanded.
"we think we can scale it up to a few hundred," vuleti?
says.
"if you want to use this system as a quantum computer, it becomes interesting on the order of 100 atoms, depending on what system you're trying to simulate."
for now, the researchers are planning to test the 51-atom system as a quantum simulator, specifically on path-planning optimization problems that can be solved using adiabatic quantum computing—a form of quantum computing first proposed by edward farhi, the cecil and ida green professor of physics at mit.
adiabatic quantum computing proposes that the ground state of a quantum system describes the solution to the problem of interest.
when that system can be evolved to produce the problem itself, the end state of the system can confirm the solution.
"you can start by preparing the system in a simple and known state of lowest energy, for instance all atoms in their ground states, then slowly deform it to represent the problem you want to solve, for instance, the traveling salesman problem," vuleti?
says.
"it's a slow change of some parameters in the system, which is exactly what we do in this experiment.
so our system is geared toward these adiabatic quantum computing problems."
more information: probing many-body dynamics on a 51-atom quantum simulator, nature (2017).
http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature24622
related: observation of a many-body dynamical phase transition with a 53-qubit quantum simulator, nature (2017).
http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature24654 (read: quantum simulators wield control over more than 50 qubits, setting new record: http://physorg.com/news431172153.html )
provided by massachusetts institute of technology
a new kind of quantum computer is being proposed by scientists from the tu wien (vienna) and japan (national institute of informatics and ntt basic research labs).
the quantum computer is the holy grail of quantum technology.
its computing power would eclipse even the fastest classical computers we have today.
a team of researchers from tu wien (vienna) the national institute for informatics (tokyo) and ntt basic research labs in japan has now proposed a new architecture for quantum computing, based on microscopic defects in diamond.
a reliable quantum computer capable of solving complex problems would have to consist of billions of quantum systems, and such a device is still out of reach.
but the researchers are convinced that the basic elements of their newly proposed architecture are better suited to be miniaturized, mass-produced and integrated on a chip than previously suggested quantum computing concepts.
experiments towards the new quantum computing architecture are already being undertaken at tu wien.
fragile quantum superpositions
for decades, scientists have been trying to use quantum systems for logical calculations.
"in a classical computer, one bit can only store a number: zero or one.
quantum physics, however, allows superpositions of states.
a quantum bit can be in the state zero and the state one at the same time – and this opens up unbelievable possibilities for computing", says jörg schmiedmayer (tu wien).
such superposition states can be implemented in different kinds of quantum systems, such as ions, captured in electromagnetic traps, or in superconducting quantum bits.
the architecture which has now been published in the journal physical review x is different: nitrogen atoms which can occupy two different spin states are injected into a small diamond.
every nitrogen defect is trapped in an optical resonator made of two mirrors.
via glass fibres, photons are coupled to the quantum system consisting of the resonator, the diamond and the nitrogen atom.
this way, it is possible to read and manipulate the state of the quantum system without destroying the quantum properties of the spins in the diamond.
realistic quantum computers need error correction
each system – made up of mirrors, diamond and a nitrogen defect – can store one quantum bit of information: zero, one, or an arbitrary superposition of both.
but usually such a quantum bit is very unstable.
error correction procedures are needed to build a quantum computer that works reliably.
"if error correction is used, a quantum bit cannot be stored in one single quantum particle any more.
instead, a complex architecture of interconnected quantum systems is required", says michael trupke (tu wien).
the researchers calculated how the resonators, diamonds and nitrogen atoms can be assembled to create an error resistant two dimensional quantum system, a so-called "topologically protected quantum computer".
according to the calculations, about 4.5 billion such quantum systems would be sufficient to implement the algorithm "shor-2048", which is able to calculate prime factors of a 2048-bit-number.
this huge number of quantum elements is required in any quantum computer architecture, no matter whether ion traps, superconducting quantum bits or nitrogen spins in diamonds are used.
"our approach has the big advantage that we know how to make the elements smaller.
this architecture has great potential for miniaturization and mass production", says michael trupke.
"whole industries are working with diamonds, materials science is progressing rapidly.
there are still many obstacles to overcome, but connecting nitrogen spins in solid materials opens up a path that could finally lead to a functioning quantum computer."
only the beginning – just like the transistor
trupke compares the current state of quantum computing with the early days of electronic computing: "when the first transistors were built, nobody could imagine placing them on a small chip by the billions.
today, we carry around such chips in our pockets.
these nitrogen spins in diamond could develop just like transistors did in classical computer science."
at tu wien, researchers have begun to create a small-scale realisation of this new architecture.
"we have the great advantage of being able to collaborate with a number of internationally renowned research teams in materials research and quantum technology right here at tu wien", says jörg schmiedmayer.
friedrich aumayr works on methods to inject the nitrogen atoms into the diamonds, peter mohn obtains numerical data in large-scale computer simulations.
the microcavity arrays are the result of an ongoing collaboration with ulrich schmid at the centre for micro- and nanostructures (zmns) within tu wien.
diamond chips are routinely analysed in the university's own x-ray centre.
there may still be a long way to go before algorithms like shor-2048 run on a quantum computer.
but scientists believe that it should become possible to entangle quantum building blocks, creating larger cluster cells, within the next few years.
"once this happens, the scale-up will be fast", says kae nemoto of the national institute of informatics.
"in the end," schmiedmayer says, "it all depends on whether we manage to enter an era of mass production and miniaturization in quantum technology.
i do not see any physical laws that should keep us from doing that."
provided by vienna university of technology
prof. manfred hauswirth, director of the fraunhofer institute for open communication systems fokus in berlin, talks about the opportunities, applications and potential roadblocks for quantum computing.
when will quantum computing become relevant for industry?
prof. hauswirth: we’re only just starting to investigate possible application scenarios, but it would be wrong to think that it’s all a long time in the future.
although we have only few practical results at the moment, the technology and the application know-how are developing very quickly.
every euro invested into developing practically usable quantum computers will pay off in many ways.
it will enable new projects here in germany, help to create new jobs and help to innovate new forms of value creation.
therefore it’s important that industry gets ready right now.
and, of course, this must be supported by strategic investments by the state.
google, ibm and alibaba are all building quantum computers.
china launched the first quantum satellite back in 2016.
what can europe and germany do to fight the competition from china and the usa?
prof. hauswirth: europe has a lot to offer here.
we have a lot of expertise in the actual quantum processes that underly quantum computing.
and more importantly still, we have an in-depth understanding of the potential applications of quantum computing.
in other words, we’re familiar with the production processes, and we have the necessary know-how in material sciences and logistics.
that’s what counts in the current phase, where research is now focusing on the potential applications of quantum technology.
there’s a reason why ibm and google now have locations in germany.
it’s because they both need this knowledge.
fraunhofer and ibm are getting the first quantum computer to germany.
why is this so relevant?
prof. hauswirth: firstly, it’s to investigate technical feasibility and applications potential.
you can’t just run any algorithm on a quantum computer.
we need to test which algorithms are suitable and then find an easy way to make them usable for industrial applications.
the translation process is a prerequisite for the practical applications that we want to develop with partners from industry.
another key issue is to ensure our digital sovereignty.
having a location in germany will mean that all the data is processed according to european law and our european data-protection standards.
what are your hopes for current developments in quantum computing and the impacts it will have on the economy and society?
prof. hauswirth: many areas today already depend on massively complex computations – take simulations in materials research, for example, or traffic flow models, or algorithmic trading and other complex stock-market transactions.
this requires huge computing resources and consumes a lot of processing time.
quantum computers will make it much more efficient to carry out many of these simulations – meaning that we can develop new materials more quickly, increase the predictive accuracy of forecasts, control traffic more efficiently, or model the chemical processes required for battery development and acceleration of the transition to a sustainable energy system.
are there any problems that quantum computers cannot solve?
prof. hauswirth: quantum computing is not really suitable for processes in which the next step depends on the result of the previous one – i.e., where computations build on one another – which is the case in classic business processes.
day-to-day data-processing applications require computation on a much smaller scale for which traditional computers will always be more efficient and more economical.
quantum computing will complement conventional computing for some types of problems but will not replace all computers.
in many areas, it will also make sense to use a hybrid solution of conventional and quantum computing.
are there any concrete hurdles that still prevent a breakthrough of quantum computing?
prof. hauswirth: the stability of qubits and the stability of entanglement are vital for the performance of a quantum computer.
today’s quantum computer hardware is still extremely sensitive, and the technical requirements are very high.
for example, a quantum processor must be cooled to a temperature approaching absolute zero; and it must be protected against any form of radiation and vibration.
at present, a lot of research in this field is focusing on how to reduce the technical efforts required to achieve this.
how long do we have to wait until we see the beginnings of a widespread commercial use of quantum computing?
prof. hauswirth: it’s going to take at least 10 years, if not 20, before quantum computers emerge from the lab and find widespread applications.
what’s more important, however, is that when we reach this point, we are ready with the necessary software and expertise.
we already know where the journey’s heading, because we’re helping to draw the map.
fraunhofer has a key role to play here.
our job is to help bring industry and applied research into the best position and ensure they are ready.
the interview was conducted by mandy bartel.
for the first time ever, a quantum computer has performed a computational task that would be essentially impossible for a conventional computer to complete, according to a team from google.
scientists and engineers from the company's lab in santa barbara announced the milestone in a report published wednesday in the journal nature.
they said their machine was able to finish its job in just 200 seconds—and that the world's most powerful supercomputers would need 10,000 years to accomplish the same task.
the task itself, which involved executing a randomly chosen sequence of instructions, does not have any particular practical uses.
but experts say the achievement is still significant as a demonstration of the future promise of quantum computing.
william oliver of mit compared the feat to the first successful flight by the wright brothers.
"it is what the event represented, rather than what it practically accomplished, that was paramount," he wrote in a commentary that accompanied the study.
google's scientists are hailing the achievement as the first demonstration of what's known as "quantum supremacy."
the phrase was coined in 2012 by john preskill, a theoretical physicist at caltech, to describe the point at which quantum computers can do things that classical computers simply can't.
not everyone agrees that google's announcement represents true quantum supremacy.
computer scientists at ibm have countered that their most powerful supercomputer, called summit, could complete the same task in 2.5 days rather than 10,000 years.
still, google's success is a noteworthy steppingstone on what will probably be a long and winding road to quantum supremacy, preskill said.
"it won't change anything overnight, but it is significant that quantum computers are now at the stage that at least in some arena, they can outperform the best computers on earth," he said.
preskill spoke to the los angeles times about where quantum computing stands today and what types of big problems it may help us solve in the future.
but be forewarned: this is brand-new technology with a whole lot of unknowns.
q: how did you become interested in quantum computing?
a: around the mid-1990s it was discovered that if you had a quantum computer, you'd be able to solve some really hard problems.
the one that made the biggest splash was that you'd be able to break widely used cryptosystems that were considered unbreakable because they required too hard a computation.
i thought that was the most interesting thing i'd ever heard—this idea that whether you can solve a problem or not depends on whether the world is described by quantum mechanics instead of ordinary classical physics.
q: how is a quantum computer different from a conventional computer?
a: the language that classical computers speak is all about manipulating strings of zeros and ones, but the language of quantum physics is quite different.
this is more of a metaphor than a technically accurate statement, but in a quantum computer you have a qubit, which can be a 0 and 1 at the same time.
that's a way of describing how they speak a completely different language.
the potential promise of quantum computing is that a quantum computer does something that we could never do with ordinary digital computers.
and whether we can turn that into something useful is very much a topic of current research.
q: what kinds of problems would you need to have a quantum computer to solve?
a: where the applications are most obvious is when we want to figure out how some big quantum system is going to behave.
for example, chemists try to describe very precisely what happens when you try to build a big molecule.
they try to put that on the computer, but when the molecule gets big it's just too hard because quantum mechanics is really important in a molecule, and you just can't describe what it is doing in terms of ordinary bits.
but on a quantum computer, you could describe it very well.
q: does that have real-world applications?
a: we think in quantum chemistry there will be a big impact, which could be important in agriculture and human health.
it could help with the development of new pharmaceuticals, new energy sources, new ways to collect solar power, and new materials.
that might be quite a ways down the road, but it's part of what gets people excited about the potential applications.
q: are scientists currently using quantum computers to solve problems?
a: people are experimenting, but there isn't anything spectacular to report along those lines yet.
i don't think anybody has done anything with a quantum computer so far that you couldn't do much better with existing digital, classical computers.
but people are kind of gearing up, figuring the technology will mature, and they want to be ready.
exactly when we will see real economic impact from quantum computing, nobody really knows.
q: what led you to coin the phrase "quantum supremacy" in 2012?
a: i suggested this term thinking we should take note that something kind of special is happening in the history of technology.
as quantum computation advances, we will reach the point where we are doing things with quantum computers that we think go beyond what we can do with current or foreseeable digital computers.
q: but not everyone likes that term, right?
a: some people think it is hyping the state of the current technology too much and that it feeds unwarranted or unrealistic expectations of what the near-term implications are going to be.
i understand that concern.
we don't want to overclaim.
google has this machine, but whether it can do anything useful that anybody cares about over the next few years—nobody knows.
we are in an era where we have this powerful device and don't know what to do with it.
we have to experiment with it and try different things.
we have to drive it around the block and see what we can we do.
q: would you say google's announcement is a big deal?
a: it depends on what you think is a big deal.
i would say it is an incremental step, but we might as well sit back and enjoy it as an indication that the technology of quantum computing is marching forward and we are getting to the point where potentially we can do things with quantum computers that we couldn't do with classical ones.
q: what steps still need to be taken in order for quantum computers to become a reality?
a: more qubits, less noise.
that will make the quantum computer more powerful.
presumably, both of these will continue to happen.
q: any thoughts on when quantum computers might become more useful?
a: it could be decades, but nobody can say for sure.
there are a lot of different ideas out there, and with a breakthrough, the technology could take off.
q: do you think that one day quantum computing will be the standard?
a: based on our current understanding, i think quantum computers will have very specialized applications.
but we can't say for sure how far-reaching those will be.
it seems unlikely that you will want to do your email on a quantum computer.
but it's actually not so crazy to say that in the future, we might have a quantum internet which sends quantum information around because that could have advantages for encryption.
it is very hard to eavesdrop on information that is encoded in quantum states.
whether that will happen or not, nobody is really sure.
(this interview has been edited for length and clarity.)
©2019 los angeles times
distributed by tribune content agency, llc.
(phys.org)—in a key step toward building a machine that promises to revolutionize computing, princeton researchers have developed a method that could quickly and reliably transmit information through a computer using the power of subatomic particles.
the finding, by a team led by princeton's associate professor of physics jason petta, could eventually allow engineers to build a working quantum computer.
by using principles radically different from classical physics, quantum computers would allow mathematicians to solve problems impossible to approach with standard computers: factoring immense numbers, cracking codes or simulating molecular behavior.
quantum computers take advantage of the strange behaviors of subatomic particles like electrons.
by harnessing electrons as they spin, scientists could use the particles to form the basis for a new type of computing.
the problem, though, is that these incredibly tiny electrons are hard to control.
so far, scientists have only been able to harness extremely small numbers of them.
but in a recent series of experiments, petta's team has demonstrated a new approach that could eventually allow engineers to build quantum computers consisting of millions of quantum bits, or qubits.
"the whole game at this point in quantum computing is trying to build a larger system," said andrew houck, an associate professor of electrical engineering at princeton who is part of the research team.
to transfer information petta's team used a stream of microwave photons to analyze a pair of electrons trapped in a tiny cage called a quantum dot.
the "spin state" of the electrons—information about how they are spinning—serves as the qubit, a basic unit of information.
the microwave stream allows the scientists to read that information.
"we create a cavity with mirrors on both ends—but they don't reflect visible light, they reflect microwave radiation," petta said.
"then we send microwaves in one end, and we look at the microwaves as they come out the other end.
the microwaves are affected by the spin states of the electrons in the cavity, and we can read that change."
in an ordinary sense, the distances involved are very small; the entire apparatus operates over a little more than a centimeter.
but on the subatomic scale, they are vast.
it is like coordinating the motion of a top spinning on the moon with another on the surface of the earth.
"it's the most amazing thing," said jake taylor, a physicist at the national institute of standards and technology, who worked on the project with the princeton team.
"you have a single electron almost completely changing the properties of an inch-long electrical system."
for years, teams of scientists have pursued the idea of using quantum mechanics to build a new machine that would revolutionize computing.
the goal is not to build a faster or more powerful computer, but to build one that approaches problems in a completely different fashion.
standard computers store information as classical "bits," which can take on a value of either 0 or 1.
these bits allow programmers to create the complex instructions that are the basis for modern computing power.
since alan turing took the first steps toward creating a computer at princeton and the university of cambridge in the 1930's, engineers have created vastly more powerful and complex machines, but this basic binary system has remained unchanged.
the power of a quantum computer comes from the rules of quantum mechanics, which describe the universe of subatomic particles.
quantum mechanics says that an electron can spin in one direction, representing a 1, or in another direction, a 0.
but it can also be in something called "superposition" representing all states between 1 and 0.
if scientists and engineers could build a working machine that takes advantage of this, they would open up entirely new fields of computing.
"the point of a quantum computers is not that they can do what a normal computer can do but faster; that's not what they are," houck said.
"the quantum computer would allow us to approach problems differently.
it would allow us to solve problems that cannot be solved with a normal computer."
mathematicians are still working on possible uses for a quantum system, but the machines could allow the accomplishment of tasks such as predicting the behavior of molecules.
one challenge facing scientists is that the spins of electrons, or any other quantum particles, are incredibly delicate.
any outside influences, whether a wisp of magnetism or glimpse of light, destabilizes the electrons' spins and introduces errors.
over the years, scientists have developed techniques to observe spin states without disturbing them.
(this year's nobel prize in physics honored two scientists, serge haroche and david wineland, who first demonstrated the direct observation of quantum particles.)
but analyzing small numbers of spins is not enough; millions will be required to make a real quantum processor.
to make the quantum dots, the team isolated a pair of electrons on a small section of material called a "semiconductor nanowire."
basically, that means a wire that is so thin that it can hold electrons like soda bubbles in a straw.
they then created small "cages" along the wire.
the cages are set up so that electrons will settle into a particular cage depending on their energy level.
this is how the princeton team reads the spin state: electrons of similar spin will repel, while those of different spins will attract.
so the team manipulates the electrons to a certain energy level and then reads their position.
if they are in the same cage, they are spinning differently; if they are in different cages, the spins are the same.
the second step is to place this quantum dot inside the microwave channel, allowing the team to transfer the information about the pair's spin state—the qubit.
petta said the next step is to increase the reliability of the setup for a single electron pair.
after that, the team plans to add more quantum dots to create more qubits.
team members are cautiously optimistic.
there appear to be no insurmountable problems at this point but, as with any system, increasing complexity could lead to unforeseen difficulties.
"the methods we are using here are scalable, and we would like to use them in a larger system," petta said.
"but to make use of the scaling, it needs to work a little better.
the first step is to make better mirrors for the microwave cavity."
the research was reported in the journal nature on oct. 18.
provided by princeton university
researchers have successfully used sound waves to control quantum information in a single electron, a significant step towards efficient, robust quantum computers made from semiconductors.
the international team, including researchers from the university of cambridge, sent high-frequency sound waves across a modified semiconductor device to direct the behaviour of a single electron, with efficiencies in excess of 99 percent.
the results are reported in the journal nature communications.
a quantum computer would be able to solve previously unsolvable computational problems by taking advantage of the strange behaviour of particles at the subatomic scale, and quantum phenomena such as entanglement and superposition.
however, precisely controlling the behaviour of quantum particles is a mammoth task.
"what would make a quantum computer so powerful is its ability to scale exponentially," said co-author hugo lepage, a ph.d. candidate in cambridge's cavendish laboratory, who performed the theoretical work for the current study.
"in a classical computer, to double the amount of information you have to double the number of bits.
but in a quantum computer, you'd only need to add one more quantum bit, or qubit, to double the information."
last month, researchers from google claimed to have reached 'quantum supremacy', the point at which a quantum computer can perform calculations beyond the capacity of the most powerful supercomputers.
however, the quantum computers which google, ibm and others are developing are based on superconducting loops, which are complex circuits and, like all quantum systems, are highly fragile.
"the smallest fluctuation or deviation will corrupt the quantum information contained in the phases and currents of the loops," said lepage.
"this is still very new technology and expansion beyond the intermediate scale may require us to go down to the single particle level."
instead of superconducting loops, the quantum information in the quantum computer lepage and his colleagues are devising use the 'spin' of an electron—its inherent angular momentum, which can be up or down—to store quantum information.
"harnessing spin to power a functioning quantum computer is a more scalable approach than using superconductivity, and we believe that using spin could lead to a quantum computer which is far more robust, since spin interactions are set by the laws of nature," said lepage.
using spin allows the quantum information to be more easily integrated with existing systems.
the device developed in the current work is based on widely-used semiconductors with some minor modifications.
the device, which was tested experimentally by lepage's co-authors from the institut néel, measures just a few millionths of a metre long.
the researchers laid metallic gates over a semiconductor and applied a voltage, which generated a complex electric field.
the researchers then directed high-frequency sound waves over the device, causing it to vibrate and distort, like a tiny earthquake.
as the sound waves propagate, they trap the electrons, pushing them through the device in a very precise way, as if the electrons are 'surfing' on the sound waves.
the researchers were able to control the behaviour of a single electron with 99.5 percent efficiency.
"to control a single electron in this way is already difficult, but to get to a point where we can have a working quantum computer, we need to be able to control multiple electrons, which get exponentially more difficult as the qubits start to interact with each other," said lepage.
in the coming months, the researchers will begin testing the device with multiple electrons, which would bring a working quantum computer another step closer.
provided by university of cambridge
the quantum computer is the holy grail of quantum technology.
its computing power would eclipse even the fastest classical computers we have today.
a team of researchers from tu wien (vienna) the national institute for informatics (tokyo) and ntt basic research labs in japan has now proposed a new architecture for quantum computing, based on microscopic defects in diamond.
a reliable quantum computer capable of solving complex problems would have to consist of billions of quantum systems, and such a device is still out of reach.
but the researchers are convinced that the basic elements of their newly proposed architecture are better suited to be miniaturized, mass-produced and integrated on a chip than previously suggested quantum computing concepts.
experiments towards the new quantum computing architecture are already being undertaken at tu wien.
fragile quantum superpositions
for decades, scientists have been trying to use quantum systems for logical calculations.
“in a classical computer, one bit can only store a number: zero or one.
quantum physics, however, allows superpositions of states.
a quantum bit can be in the state zero and the state one at the same time – and this opens up unbelievable possibilities for computing”, says jörg schmiedmayer (tu wien).
such superposition states can be implemented in different kinds of quantum systems, such as ions, captured in electromagnetic traps, or in superconducting quantum bits.
the architecture which has now been published in the journal “physical review x” is different: nitrogen atoms which can occupy two different spin states are injected into a small diamond.
every nitrogen defect is trapped in an optical resonator made of two mirrors.
via glass fibres, photons are coupled to the quantum system consisting of the resonator, the diamond and the nitrogen atom.
this way, it is possible to read and manipulate the state of the quantum system without destroying the quantum properties of the spins in the diamond.
realistic quantum computers need error correction
each system – made up of mirrors, diamond and a nitrogen defect – can store one quantum bit of information: zero, one, or an arbitrary superposition of both.
but usually such a quantum bit is very unstable.
error correction procedures are needed to build a quantum computer that works reliably.
“if error correction is used, a quantum bit cannot be stored in one single quantum particle any more.
instead, a complex architecture of interconnected quantum systems is required”, says michael trupke (tu wien).
the researchers calculated how the resonators, diamonds and nitrogen atoms can be assembled to create an error resistant two dimensional quantum system, a so-called “topologically protected quantum computer”.
according to the calculations, about 4.5 billion such quantum systems would be sufficient to implement the algorithm “shor-2048”, which is able to calculate prime factors of a 2048-bit-number.
this huge number of quantum elements is required in any quantum computer architecture, no matter whether ion traps, superconducting quantum bits or nitrogen spins in diamonds are used.
“our approach has the big advantage that we know how to make the elements smaller.
this architecture has great potential for miniaturization and mass production”, says michael trupke.
“whole industries are working with diamonds, materials science is progressing rapidly.
there are still many obstacles to overcome, but connecting nitrogen spins in solid materials opens up a path that could finally lead to a functioning quantum computer.”
only the beginning – just like the transistor
trupke compares the current state of quantum computing with the early days of electronic computing: “when the first transistors were built, nobody could imagine placing them on a small chip by the billions.
today, we carry around such chips in our pockets.
these nitrogen spins in diamond could develop just like transistors did in classical computer science.”
at tu wien, researchers have begun to create a small-scale realisation of this new architecture.
“we have the great advantage of being able to collaborate with a number of internationally renowned research teams in materials research and quantum technology right here at tu wien”, says jörg schmiedmayer.
friedrich aumayr works on methods to inject the nitrogen atoms into the diamonds, peter mohn obtains numerical data in large-scale computer simulations.
the microcavity arrays are the result of an ongoing collaboration with ulrich schmid at the centre for micro- and nanostructures (zmns) within tu wien.
diamond chips are routinely analysed in the university’s own x-ray centre.
there may still be a long way to go before algorithms like shor-2048 run on a quantum computer.
but scientists believe that it should become possible to entangle quantum building blocks, creating larger cluster cells, within the next few years.
“once this happens, the scale-up will be fast”, says kae nemoto of the national institute of informatics.
“in the end,” schmiedmayer says, “it all depends on whether we manage to enter an era of mass production and miniaturization in quantum technology.
i do not see any physical laws that should keep us from doing that.”
(physorg.com) -- the fastest quantum computer bit that exploits the main advantage of the qubit over the conventional bit has been demonstrated by researchers at university of michigan, u.s.
naval research laboratory and the university of california at san diego.
the scientists used lasers to create an initialized quantum state of this solid-state qubit at rates of about a gigahertz, or a billion times per second.
they can also use lasers to achieve fundamental steps toward programming it.
a conventional bit can be a 0 or a 1.
a quantum bit, or qubit, can be both at the same time.
until now, scientists couldn't stabilize that duality.
physics professor duncan steel, doctoral student xiaodong xu and their colleagues used lasers to coherently, or stably, trap the spin of one electron confined in a single semiconductor quantum dot.
a quantum dot is like a transistor in a conventional computer.
the scientists trapped the spin in a dark state in which they can arbitrarily adjust the amount of 0 and 1 the qubit represents.
they call this state "dark" because it does not absorb light.
therefore, light does not cause loss of coherence between the two states.
in other words, the light does not destabilize the qubit.
a paper on these findings will be published in nature physics and is available early in the online edition.
"we are the first to show that you can do this to a single electron in a self-assembled quantum dot," steel said.
"if you're going to do quantum computing, you have to be able to work with one electron at a time."
spin is an intrinsic property of the electron that isn't a real rotation.
steel compares it to the magnetic poles.
electrons are said to have spin up or down.
in quantum computing, the up and down directions represent the 0s and 1s of conventional computing.
steel's approach to developing a quantum computer is to use ultrafast lasers to manipulate arrays of semiconductor quantum dots, each containing one electron.
quantum logic gates are formed by quantum mechanical interactions between the dots.
previously in steel's lab, researchers have used a laser to produce an electron in a state representative of a 1 or a 0 and a small amount of the other state.
now, using two laser frequencies, they have trapped it as a 0 and a 1 at the same time, and they can adjust the amount of each.
because the electron is trapped in a dark state, applied light can't destroy the coherence.
energy from light can flip the spin of electrons, or quantum bits, which would jumble any information being stored in the bit.
"this dark state is a place where information can be stored without any error," steel said.
because of their ability to represent multiple states simultaneously, quantum computers could theoretically factor numbers dramatically faster and with smaller computers than conventional computers.
for this reason, they could vastly improve computer security.
"the national security agency has said that based on our present technology, we have about a 20-year window of security," steel said.
"that means if we sent up a satellite today, it would take somebody about 20 years to crack the code.
quantum computers will let you develop a code that would be impossible to crack with a conventional computer."
physicists achieved this by using two continuous wave lasers.
the paper is called "coherent population trapping of an electron spin in a single negatively charged quantum dot."
it is available online at http://www.nature.com/nphys/jo … /full/nphys1054.html .
provided by university of michigan
imagine communicating with your bank, the irs or your doctor by way of an internet that was perfectly secure.
your most private data would be protected with absolute certainty and, better yet, if any bad actor were to try to eavesdrop you would know immediately.
such is the promise of secure quantum communication.
should quantum communication ever become the standard—if there is ever to be a quantum internet, for instance—technical challenges lie ahead.
among the most critical will be devices that can send and receive quantum data.
to that end, researchers at stanford university have created a novel quantum light source that might someday serve as the basis for quantum communication.
they explained their findings in a paper published by the journal nature photonics.
the physics of quantum communication is admittedly complex.
standard lasers are actually not useful for secure communication because they emit what is called "classical" light.
data eavesdroppers could extract any data being carried via classical light without detection.
in contrast, a quantum internet would be based on "quantum" light, in which a single unit of light—a single photon—cannot be measured without being destroyed.
therefore, an efficient source of quantum light would enable perfectly secure communication.
senior author jelena vuckovic, a professor of electrical engineering at stanford, has been working for years to develop various nanoscale lasers and quantum technologies that might help conventional computers communicate faster and more efficiently using light instead of electricity.
she and her team, including lead author kevin fischer, a doctoral candidate, realized that a modified nanoscale laser can be used to efficiently generate quantum light for quantum communication.
"the problem is that the quantum light is much weaker than the rest of the light coming from such a modified laser—it is difficult to pick up," vuckovic said.
"so, we created a way to filter out the unwanted light, allowing us to read the quantum signal much better."
the filtering works in a fashion similar to the way noise-canceling headphones operate, only with light, instead of sound.
with the headphones, a sensor actively gauges the frequency of relatively constant ambient sound—the rumble of traffic, the drone of an airplane engine, the thrum of a refrigerator—and produces a similar pattern, which can be used to cancel out the undesirable sound.
"some of the light coming back from the modified laser is like noise, preventing us from seeing the quantum light," fischer said.
"we canceled it out to reveal and emphasize the quantum signal hidden beneath."
vuckovic's team adapted an interference technique borrowed from 1930s-era radio engineering to cancel the unwanted classical light.
they first figured out what the "noise" looks like and played it back.
by carefully adjusting how the canceling light and the classical light overlap, the unwanted light is canceled and the once-hidden quantum light is revealed.
"this is a very promising development," vuckovic said.
"it provides us with a practical pathway to secure quantum communications."
she and her team are now working on creating a working prototype, but that will have to wait for another paper.
provided by stanford university
(physorg.com) -- while quantum dots have existed since the 1980s, only in the past decade have physicists successfully created lateral few-electron single quantum dots.
these quantum dots enable physicists to manipulate quantum spins, which could be used as qubits for quantum information applications.
along these lines, a team of physicists from the national research council in canada who were responsible for the original lateral few-electron single quantum dot have recently designed a new few-electron triple quantum dot circuit, and demonstrated that all three quantum dots can be tuned in resonance.
as the scientists explained in a recent issue of applied physics letters, the triple quantum dot design could be useful in research studies of quantum dots where knowing the exact number of electrons is important.
the design could also have applications in future quantum information devices involving electron spin qubits.
“having all three dots in resonance is a requirement for certain quantum information functionalities such as a spin bus for coherently transmitting spin information across a circuit,” coauthor louis gaudreau told physorg.com.
the group fabricated and tried several device designs, but the early versions were found to be marginal as triple quantum dots and not tunable enough to be useful.
finally the researchers found a design which allowed one to three electrons to be isolated in a center dot with a wider occupation number range available for the outer two dots.
to demonstrate the required tunability of the circuit, the scientists adjusted the various gate voltages to settings where all three quantum dots were in resonance with each other.
these locations are called quadruple points.
close to the quadruple points, the group demonstrated the presence of charge reconfigurations analogous to quantum cellular automata effects.
“going from double quantum dots, which are being studied in several laboratories, to a triple quantum dot is a more significant step than just adding one extra spin qubit,” gaudreau said.
“there are many concepts which require three quantum dots, such as demonstrating entanglement, running simple quantum algorithms and quantum computing error correction schemes.
“ultimately, we plan to use our device for running simple quantum information applications, but as a first step we need to demonstrate we can manipulate spins in such a compelx circuit.
one of the interesting concepts we are also studying with this device is ‘backaction’ i.e.
the way making the measurement itself affects the result.”
more information: l. gaudreau, a. kam, g. granger, s. a. studenikin, p. zawadzki, and a. s. sachrajda.
“a tunable few electron triple quantum dot.” applied physics letters 95, 193101 (2009).
copyright 2009 physorg.com.
all rights reserved.
this material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in whole or part without the express written permission of physorg.com.
researchers at the university of oxford have achieved a quantum logic gate with record-breaking 99.9% precision, reaching the benchmark required theoretically to build a quantum computer.
quantum computers, which function according to the laws of quantum physics, have the potential to dwarf the processing power of today's computers, able to process huge amounts of information all at once.
the team achieved the logic gate, which places two atoms in a state of quantum entanglement and is the fundamental building block of quantum computing, with a precision (or fidelity) substantially greater than the previous world record.
quantum entanglement—a phenomenon described by einstein as 'spooky' but which is at the heart of quantum technologies—occurs when two particles stay connected, such that an action on one affects the other, even when they are separated by great distances.
the research, carried out by scientists from the engineering and physical sciences research council (epsrc)-funded networked quantum information technologies hub (nqit), which is led by oxford university, is reported in the journal physical review letters.
dr chris ballance, a research fellow at magdalen college, oxford and lead author of the paper, said: 'the development of a "quantum computer" is one of the outstanding technological challenges of the 21st century.
a quantum computer is a machine that processes information according to the rules of quantum physics, which govern the behaviour of microscopic particles at the scale of atoms and smaller.
'an important point is that it is not merely a different technology for computing in the same way our everyday computers work; it is at a very fundamental level a different way of processing information.
it turns out that this quantum-mechanical way of manipulating information gives quantum computers the ability to solve certain problems far more efficiently than any conceivable conventional computer.
one such problem is related to breaking secure codes, while another is searching large data sets.
quantum computers are naturally well-suited to simulating other quantum systems, which may help, for example, our understanding of complex molecules relevant to chemistry and biology.'
quantum technology is a complex area, but one analogy that has been used to explain the concept of quantum computing is that it is like being able to read all of the books in a library at the same time, whereas conventional computing is like having to read them one after another.
this may be over-simplistic, but it is useful in conveying the way in which quantum computing has the potential to revolutionise the field.
professor david lucas, of oxford university's department of physics and balliol college, oxford, a co-author of the paper, said: 'the concept of "quantum entanglement" is fundamental to quantum computing and describes a situation where two quantum objects—in our case, two individual atoms—share a joint quantum state.
that means, for example, that measuring a property of one of the atoms tells you something about the other.
'a quantum logic gate is an operation which can take two independent atoms and put them into this special entangled state.
the precision of the gate is a measure of how well this works: in our case, 99.9% precision means that, on average, 999 times out of 1,000 we will have generated the entangled state correctly, and one time out of 1,000 something went wrong.
'to put this in context, quantum theory says that - as far as anyone has found so far - you simply can't build a quantum computer at all if the precision drops below about 99%.
at the 99.9% level you can build a quantum computer in theory, but in practice it could very difficult and thus enormously expensive.
if, in the future, a precision of 99.99% can be attained, the prospects look a lot more favourable.'
professor lucas added: 'achieving a logic gate with 99.9% precision is another important milestone on the road to developing a quantum computer.
a quantum logic gate on its own does not constitute a quantum computer, but you can't build the computer without them.
'an analogy from conventional computing hardware would be that we have finally worked out how to build a transistor with good enough performance to make logic circuits, but the technology for wiring thousands of those transistors together to build an electronic computer is still in its infancy.'
provided by university of oxford
a team of cambridge researchers have found a way to control the sea of nuclei in semiconductor quantum dots so they can operate as a quantum memory device.
quantum dots are crystals made up of thousands of atoms, and each of these atoms interacts magnetically with the trapped electron.
if left alone to its own devices, this interaction of the electron with the nuclear spins, limits the usefulness of the electron as a quantum bit -- a qubit.
led by professor mete atatüre, a fellow at st john's college, university of cambridge, the research group, located at the cavendish laboratory, exploit the laws of quantum physics and optics to investigate computing, sensing or communication applications.
atatüre said: "quantum dots offer an ideal interface, as mediated by light, to a system where the dynamics of individual interacting spins could be controlled and exploited.
because the nuclei randomly 'steal' information from the electron they have traditionally been an annoyance, but we have shown we can harness them as a resource."
the cambridge team found a way to exploit the interaction between the electron and the thousands of nuclei using lasers to 'cool' the nuclei to less than 1 millikelvin, or a thousandth of a degree above the absolute zero temperature.
they then showed they can control and manipulate the thousands of nuclei as if they form a single body in unison, like a second qubit.
this proves the nuclei in the quantum dot can exchange information with the electron qubit and can be used to store quantum information as a memory device.
the findings have been published in science today.
quantum computing aims to harness fundamental concepts of quantum physics, such as entanglement and superposition principle, to outperform current approaches to computing and could revolutionise technology, business and research.
just like classical computers, quantum computers need a processor, memory, and a bus to transport the information backwards and forwards.
the processor is a qubit which can be an electron trapped in a quantum dot, the bus is a single photon that these quantum dots generate and are ideal for exchanging information.
but the missing link for quantum dots is quantum memory.
atatüre said: "instead of talking to individual nuclear spins, we worked on accessing collective spin waves by lasers.
this is like a stadium where you don't need to worry about who raises their hands in the mexican wave going round, as long as there is one collective wave because they all dance in unison.
"we then went on to show that these spin waves have quantum coherence.
this was the missing piece of the jigsaw and we now have everything needed to build a dedicated quantum memory for every qubit."
in quantum technologies, the photon, the qubit and the memory need to interact with each other in a controlled way.
this is mostly realised by interfacing different physical systems to form a single hybrid unit which can be inefficient.
the researchers have been able to show that in quantum dots, the memory element is automatically there with every single qubit.
dr dorian gangloff, one of the first authors of the paper and a fellow at st john's, said the discovery will renew interest in these types of semiconductor quantum dots.
dr gangloff explained: "this is a holy grail breakthrough for quantum dot research -- both for quantum memory and fundamental research; we now have the tools to study dynamics of complex systems in the spirit of quantum simulation."
the long term opportunities of this work could be seen in the field of quantum computing.
last month, ibm launched the world's first commercial quantum computer, and the chief executive of microsoft has said quantum computing has the potential to 'radically reshape the world'.
gangloff said: "the impact of the qubit could be half a century away but the power of disruptive technology is that it is hard to conceive of the problems we might open up -- you can try to think of it as known unknowns but at some point you get into new territory.
we don't yet know the kind of problems it will help to solve which is very exciting."
researchers from the institute for quantum computing at the university of waterloo and the national research council of canada (nrc) have, for the first time, converted the colour and bandwidth of ultrafast single photons using a room-temperature quantum memory in diamond.
shifting the colour of a photon, or changing its frequency, is necessary to optimally link components in a quantum network.
for example, in optical quantum communication, the best transmission through an optical fibre is near infrared, but many of the sensors that measure them work much better for visible light, which is a higher frequency.
being able to shift the colour of the photon between the fibre and the sensor enables higher performance operation, including bigger data rates.
the research, published in nature communications, demonstrated small frequency shifts that are useful for a communication protocol known as wavelength division multiplexing.
this is used today when a sender needs to transmit large amounts of information through a transmission so the signal is broken into smaller packets of slightly different frequencies and sent through together.
the information is then organized at the other end based on those frequencies.
in the experiments conducted at nrc, the researchers demonstrated the conversion of both the frequency and bandwidth of single photons using a room-temperature diamond quantum memory.
"originally there was this thought that you just stop the photon, store it for a little while and get it back out.
the fact that we can manipulate it at the same time is exciting," said kent fisher a phd student at the institute for quantum computing and with the department of physics and astronomy at waterloo.
"these findings could open the door for other uses of quantum memory as well."
the diamond quantum memory works by converting the photon into a particular vibration of the carbon atoms in the diamond, called a phonon.
this conversion works for many different colours of light allowing for the manipulation of a broad spectrum of light.
the energy structure of diamond allows for this to occur at room temperature with very low noise.
researchers used strong laser pulses to store and retrieve the photon.
by controlling the colours of these laser pulses, researchers controlled the colour of the retrieved photon.
"the fragility of quantum systems means that you are always working against the clock," remarked duncan england, researcher at nrc.
"the interesting step that we've shown here is that by using extremely short pulses of light, we are able to beat the clock and maintain quantum performance."
the integrated platform for photon storage and spectral conversion could be used for frequency multiplexing in quantum communication, as well as build up a very large entangled state – something called a cluster state.
researchers are interested in exploiting cluster states as the resource for quantum computing driven entirely by measurements.
"canada is a powerhouse in quantum research and technology.
this work is another example of what partners across the country can achieve when leveraging their joint expertise to build next-generation technologies," noted ben sussman, program leader for nrc's quantum photonics program.
provided by university of waterloo
does the idea of playing about with a quantum computer please you?
if so, you can check out one fresh alternative route, thanks to a group of google engineers.
how about a gpu-accelerated quantum computer?
you can take advantage of something called the quantum computing playground which has launched as a browser-based webgl chrome experiment.
it features a gpu-accelerated quantum computer with a simple ide interface.
it has its own scripting language, with debugging and 3d quantum state visualization features.
quantum computing playground can simulate quantum registers up to 22 qubits, run grover's and shor's algorithms, and has quantum gates built into the scripting language itself.
commenting, extremetech said the programs are written in a language called qscript,-which "looks a lot like any other simple bash-like scripting language."
the 'playground' web page provides some background to quantum computers and how they are unique.
"a classic computer processes bits, which at any given time can be in one of two states: 0 or 1.
quantum computers use qubits, which can exist in any superposition of states 0 and 1, and are represented by a complex number.
when n qubits are in superposition, a combination of 2^n states is created.
a classic computer can only hold one of these states at a time, while quantum computers can perform meaningful operations on superpositions of states.
this basic property of quantum computers opens a way to multiple interesting algorithms."
the comments expressed by technology sites describing the new quantum computing playground mentioned the lack of any detailed tutorial.
they note that one needs some sort of programming experience to dig in and enjoy.
said i programmer, for example: "one of the problems with using it is that it doesn't provide a course in quantum computing or quantum principles and to make much sense of it you need to know something about quantum mechanics and have a rough idea if what quantum gates are all about."
a step by step demo is provided along with some very useful information on the help page but the need for previous exposure to the principles of quantum computing would be helpful.
extremetech said, "the help/about page has a few details about the inner workings of the simulator and qscript, but you'll still need a pretty solid grounding in computer science or quantum computer theory."
all the same, the quantum computing playground needs little coaxing to draw the interest of those who are genuinely curious about working with quantum algorithms.
"if you have ever wanted to try your hand at quantum algorithms, there is no longer an excuse," i programmer said thursday.
after all, according to the playground site, quantum computers that perform operations on sequences of qubits are not available commercially.
"the proof-of-concepts for capabilities of quantum computing have been demonstrated in multiple laboratories around the world, so there is a chance that quantum computers will become one day everyday's reality.
for now, you can experience the technology of tomorrow today, inside our playground."
© 2014 tech xplore
physicists working at the university of california, santa barbara and the university of konstanz in germany have developed a breakthrough in the use of diamond in quantum physics, marking an important step toward quantum computing.
the results are reported in this week's online edition of nature physics.
the physicists were able to coax the fragile quantum information contained within a single electron in diamond to move into an adjacent single nitrogen nucleus, and then back again using on-chip wiring.
"this ability is potentially useful to create an atomic-scale memory element in a quantum computer based on diamond, since the subatomic nuclear states are more isolated from destructive interactions with the outside world," said david awschalom, senior author.
awschalom is director of ucsb's center for spintronics & quantum computation, professor of physics, electrical and computer engineering, and the peter j. clarke director of the california nanosystems institute.
awschalom said the discovery shows the high-fidelity operation of a quantum mechanical gate at the atomic level, enabling the transfer of full quantum information to and from one electron spin and a single nuclear spin at room temperature.
the process is scalable, and opens the door to new solid-state quantum device development.
scientists have recently shown that it is possible to synthesize thousands of these single electron states with beams of nitrogen atoms, intentionally creating defects to trap the single electrons.
"what makes this demonstration particularly exciting is that a nitrogen atom is a part of the defect itself, meaning that these sub-atomic memory elements automatically scale with the number of logical bits in the quantum computer," said lead author greg fuchs, a postdoctoral fellow at ucsb.
rather than using logical elements like transistors to manipulate digital states like "0" or "1," a quantum computer needs logical elements capable of manipulating quantum states that may be "0" and "1" at the same time.
even at ambient temperature, these defects in diamond can do exactly that, and have recently become a leading candidate to form a quantum version of a transistor.
however, there are still major challenges to building a diamond-based quantum computer.
one of these is finding a method to store quantum information in a scalable way.
unlike a conventional computer, where the memory and the processor are in two different physical locations, in this case they are integrated together, bit-for-bit.
"we knew that the nitrogen nuclear spin would be a good choice for a scalable quantum memory –– it was already there," said fuchs.
"the hard part was to transfer the state quickly, before it is lost to decoherence."
awschalom explained: "a key breakthrough was to use a unique property of quantum physics –– that two quantum objects can, under special conditions, become mixed to form a new composite object."
by mixing the quantum spin state of the electrons in the defect with the spin state of the nitrogen nucleus for a brief time –– less than 100 billionths of a second –– information that was originally encoded in the electrons is passed to the nucleus.
"the result is an extremely fast transfer of the quantum information to the long-lived nuclear spin, which could further enhance our capabilities to correct for errors during a quantum computation," said co-author guido burkard, a theoretical physicist at the university of konstanz, who developed a model to understand the storage process.
provided by university of california - santa barbara
in years to come, quantum computers and quantum networks might be able to tackle tasks that are inaccessible to traditional computer systems.
for instance, they could be used to simulate complex matter or enable fundamentally secure communications.
the elementary building blocks of quantum information systems are known as qubits.
for quantum technology to become a tangible reality, researchers will need to identify strategies to control many qubits with very high precision rates.
spins of individual particles in solids, such as electrons and nuclei have recently shown great prom … of quantum networks.
while some researchers were able to demonstrate an elementary control of these qubits, so far, no one has reported entangled quantum states containing more than three spins.
in order to reach the computational power necessary to complete complex tasks, quantum registers should be significantly larger than those realized so far.
however, controlling individual spins within complex and strongly interacting quantum systems has so far proved to be very challenging.
recently, a team of researchers at tu delft and element six has successfully demonstrated a fully controllable ten-qubit spin register with a quantum memory up to one minute.
their findings, presented in a paper published in physical review x, could pave the way for the development of larger and yet controllable quantum registers, ultimately opening up new exciting possibilities for quantum computing.
"the main objective of our study was to realize a precisely controlled system of a large amount of qubits using the spins of atoms embedded in a diamond," tim taminiau, one of the researchers who carried out the study, told phys.org via email.
"these spins are promising quantum bits for quantum computation and quantum networks, but previous results were limited to just a few qubits.
the key open challenge is that on the one hand, all the spins in the system must be coupled together to function as a single quantum processor, but on the other hand, this makes it difficult to selectively control them with high precision."
taminiau and his colleagues successfully developed an entirely new method to control multiple qubits.
this technique uses an electron spin qubit to selectively control many individual nuclear spin qubits, while simultaneously decoupling them and thus protecting them from unwanted interactions in the system.
using their method, the researchers were able to control a considerably larger number of spins compared to previous studies, with remarkably high precision.
they applied their technique to a system composed of 10 spins associated to a nitrogen-vacancy (nv) center in diamond.
this nv center has an electron spin providing a qubit than can be optically read out (i.e.
one can determine its value) and that can be controlled with microwave pulses.
"this electron spin couples to nuclear spins in the environment," conor bradley, a ph.d. student and lead author of the study, explained.
"one such nuclear spin is the intrinsic nitrogen nuclear spin of the nv.
the additional 8 qubits are carbon-13 nuclear spins surrounding the nv.
naturally about 1.1 percent of the carbon atoms in diamond are carbon-13 and have a spin, i.e.
they can be used as a qubit, the other carbon atoms are carbon-12 and carry no spin."
although the researchers applied their method to a specific 10-qubit system, they believe that it could also be implemented on other systems, including other defect centers in diamond and silicon carbide, quantum dots and donors in silicon.
the qubits hosted by these other systems each have their own strengths for completing a variety of complex tasks.
"the main achievement of our study is a 10-spin-qubit quantum system that can store quantum information for very long times up to 75 seconds," taminiau said.
"although other researchers were able to attain similar results with ions trapped in vacuum, this combination of many qubits, precise control and long-lived quantum memory is unique for chip-based quantum bits."
the system demonstrated by taminiau and his colleagues could be a key building block for large quantum networks in which multiple nv centers, each providing several qubits, are connected together optically.
this particular capability was already outlined and shown by the researchers in a previous study.
"besides the importance of this study as a demonstration towards larger quantum information systems, this work also provides new insights into the decoherence—the loss of quantum information—for spins in solids," taminiau said.
the findings gathered by this team of researchers highlight the feasibility of studying how entangled states of multiple spin qubits decohere, as well as how correlations in the noise environment can play a vital role in this process.
the method they developed also opens up new possibilities for quantum sensing and atomic-scale imaging of individual spins, where the goal is not to control spins but rather to detect them, in order to gather insight into interesting samples for studies in chemistry, biology and material science.
in their future research, taminiau and his colleagues plan to demonstrate a technique called quantum error correction.
this particular type of error correction could help to overcome all of the inevitable imperfections of existing quantum systems, ultimately enabling the creation of large-scale quantum systems.
"this will require encoding quantum states over many qubits and performing careful measurements to detect and correct errors without disturbing the encoded information," taminiau added.
"this has so far been out of reach for any system, but our results now make it possible to pursue this using spins in diamond."
more information: c. e. bradley et al.
a ten-qubit solid-state spin register with quantum memory up to one minute, physical review x (2019).
doi: 10.1103/physrevx.9.031045
david d. awschalom et al.
quantum technologies with optically interfaced solid-state spins, nature photonics (2018).
doi: 10.1038/s41566-018-0232-2
j. cramer et al.
repeated quantum error correction on a continuously encoded qubit by real-time feedback, nature communications (2016).
doi: 10.1038/ncomms11526
g. waldherr et al.
quantum error correction in a solid-state hybrid spin register, nature (2014).
doi: 10.1038/nature12919
b. hensen et al.
loophole-free bell inequality violation using electron spins separated by 1.3 kilometres, nature (2015).
doi: 10.1038/nature15759
© 2019 science x network
researchers at the university of waterloo have developed a method that could pave the way to establishing universal standards for measuring the performance of quantum computers.
the new method, called cycle benchmarking, allows researchers to assess the potential of scalability and to compare one quantum platform against another.
"this finding could go a long way toward establishing standards for performance and strengthen the effort to build a large-scale, practical quantum computer," said joel wallman, an assistant professor at waterloo's faculty of mathematics and institute for quantum computing.
"a consistent method for characterizing and correcting the errors in quantum systems provides standardization for the way a quantum processor is assessed, allowing progress in different architectures to be fairly compared."
cycle benchmarking provides a solution that helps quantum computing users to both determine the comparative value of competing hardware platforms and increase the capability of each platform to deliver robust solutions for their applications of interest.
the breakthrough comes as the quantum computing race is rapidly heating up, and the number of cloud quantum computing platforms and offerings is quickly expanding.
in the past month alone, there have been significant announcements from microsoft, ibm and google.
this method determines the total probability of error under any given quantum computing applications when the application is implemented through randomized compiling.
this means that cycle benchmarking provides the first cross-platform means of measuring and comparing the capabilities of quantum processors that is customized to users' applications of interest.
"thanks to google's recent achievement of quantum supremacy, we are now at the dawn of what i call the `quantum discovery era', said joseph emerson, a faculty member at iqc.
"this means that error-prone quantum computers will deliver solutions to interesting computational problems, but the quality of their solutions can no longer be verified by high-performance computers.
"we are excited because cycle benchmarking provides a much-needed solution for improving and validating quantum computing solutions in this new era of quantum discovery."
emerson and wallman founded the iqc spin-off quantum benchmark inc., which has already licensed this technology to several world-leading quantum computing providers, including google's quantum ai effort.
quantum computers offer a fundamentally more powerful way of computing, thanks to quantum mechanics.
compared to a traditional or digital computer, quantum computers can solve certain types of problems more efficiently.
however, qubits—the basic processing unit in a quantum computer—are fragile; any imperfection or source of noise in the system can cause errors that lead to incorrect solutions under a quantum computation.
gaining control over a small-scale quantum computer with just one or two qubits is the first step in a larger, more ambitious endeavour.
a larger quantum computer may be able to perform increasingly complex tasks, like machine learning or simulating complex systems to discover new pharmaceutical drugs.
engineering a larger quantum computer is challenging; the spectrum of error pathways becomes more complicated as qubits are added and the quantum system scales.
characterizing a quantum system produces a profile of the noise and errors, indicating if the processor is performing the tasks or calculations, it is being asked to do.
to understand the performance of any existing quantum computer for a complex problem or to scale up a quantum computer by reducing errors, it's first necessary to characterize all significant errors affecting the system.
wallman, emerson and a group of researchers at the university of innsbruck identified a method to assess all error rates affecting a quantum computer.
they implemented this new technique for the ion trap quantum computer at the university innsbruck and found that error rates don't increase as the size of that quantum computer scales up a very promising result.
"cycle benchmarking is the first method for reliably checking if you are on the right track for scaling up the overall design of your quantum computer," said wallman.
"these results are significant because they provide a comprehensive way of characterizing errors across all quantum computing platforms."
the paper "characterizing large-scale quantum computers via cycle benchmarking" appears in nature communications.
provided by university of waterloo
quantum computers promise speedy solutions to some difficult problems, but building large-scale, general-purpose quantum devices is a problem fraught with technical challenges.
to date, many research groups have created small but functional quantum computers.
by combining a handful of atoms, electrons or superconducting junctions, researchers now regularly demonstrate quantum effects and run simple quantum algorithms—small programs dedicated to solving particular problems.
but these laboratory devices are often hard-wired to run one program or limited to fixed patterns of interactions between the quantum constituents.
making a quantum computer that can run arbitrary algorithms requires the right kind of physical system and a suite of programming tools.
atomic ions, confined by fields from nearby electrodes, are among the most promising platforms for meeting these needs.
in a paper published as the cover story in nature on august 4, researchers working with christopher monroe, a fellow of the joint quantum institute and the joint center for quantum information and computer science at the university of maryland, introduced the first fully programmable and reconfigurable quantum computer module.
the new device, dubbed a module because of its potential to connect with copies of itself, takes advantage of the unique properties offered by trapped ions to run any algorithm on five quantum bits, or qubits—the fundamental unit of information in a quantum computer.
"for any computer to be useful, the user should not be required to know what's inside," monroe says.
"very few people care what their iphone is actually doing at the physical level.
our experiment brings high-quality quantum bits up to a higher level of functionality by allowing them to be programmed and reconfigured in software."
the new module builds on decades of research into trapping and controlling ions.
it uses standard techniques but also introduces novel methods for control and measurement.
this includes manipulating many ions at once using an array of tightly-focused laser beams, as well as dedicated detection channels that watch for the glow of each ion.
"these are the kinds of discoveries that the nsf physics frontiers centers program is intended to enable," says jean cottam allen, a program director in the national science foundation's physics division.
"this work is at the frontier of quantum computing, and it's helping to lay a foundation and bring practical quantum computing closer to being a reality."
the team tested their module on small instances of three problems that quantum computers are known to solve quickly.
having the flexibility to test the module on a variety of problems is a major step forward, says shantanu debnath, a graduate student at jqi and the paper's lead author.
"by directly connecting any pair of qubits, we can reconfigure the system to implement any algorithm," debnath says.
"while it's just five qubits, we know how to apply the same technique to much larger collections."
at the module's heart, though, is something that's not even quantum: a database stores the best shapes for the laser pulses that drive quantum logic gates, the building blocks of quantum algorithms.
those shapes are calculated ahead of time using a regular computer, and the module uses software to translate an algorithm into the pulses in the database.
putting the pieces together
every quantum algorithm consists of three basic ingredients.
first, the qubits are prepared in a particular state; second, they undergo a sequence of quantum logic gates; and last, a quantum measurement extracts the algorithm's output.
the module performs these tasks using different colors of laser light.
one color prepares the ions using a technique called optical pumping, in which each qubit is illuminated until it sits in the proper quantum energy state.
the same laser helps read out the quantum state of each atomic ion at the end of the process.
in between, a separate laser strikes the ions to drive quantum logic gates.
these gates are like the switches and transistors that power ordinary computers.
here, lasers push on the ions and couple their internal qubit information to their motion, allowing any two ions in the module to interact via their strong electrical repulsion.
two ions from across the chain notice each other through this electrical interaction, just as raising and releasing one ball in a newton's cradle transfers energy to the other side.
the re-configurability of the laser beams is a key advantage, debnath says.
"by reducing an algorithm into a series of laser pulses that push on the appropriate ions, we can reconfigure the wiring between these qubits from the outside," he says.
"it becomes a software problem, and no other quantum computing architecture has this flexibility."
to test the module, the team ran three different quantum algorithms, including a demonstration of a quantum fourier transform (qft), which finds how often a given mathematical function repeats.
it is a key piece in shor's quantum factoring algorithm, which would break some of the most widely-used security standards on the internet if run on a big enough quantum computer.
two of the algorithms ran successfully more than 90% of the time, while the qft topped out at a 70% success rate.
the team says that this is due to residual errors in the pulse-shaped gates as well as systematic errors that accumulate over the course of the computation, neither of which appear fundamentally insurmountable.
they note that the qft algorithm requires all possible two-qubit gates and should be among the most complicated quantum calculations.
the team believes that eventually more qubits—perhaps as many as 100—could be added to their quantum computer module.
it is also possible to link separate modules together, either by physically moving the ions or by using photons to carry information between them.
although the module has only five qubits, its flexibility allows for programming quantum algorithms that have never been run before, debnath says.
the researchers are now looking to run algorithms on a module with more qubits, including the demonstration of quantum error correction routines as part of a project funded by the intelligence advanced research projects activity.
provided by joint quantum institute
quantum computing isn't yet far enough along that it could have helped curb the spread of this coronavirus outbreak.
but this emerging field of computing will almost certainly help scientists and researchers confront future crises.
"can we compress the rate at which we discover, for example, a treatment or an approach to this?"
asks dario gil, the director of ibm research.
"the goal is to do everything that we are doing today in terms of discovery of materials, chemistry, things like that, (in) factors of 10 times better, 100 times better,"
and that, he says, "could be game-changing."
quantum computing is the next big thing in computing, and it promises exponential advances in artificial intelligence and machine learning through the next decade and beyond, leading to potential breakthroughs in healthcare and pharmaceuticals, fertilizers, battery power, and financial services.
for a consumer with a retirement fund, "quantum computers over the next 10 to 15 years ... may help you make better personal financial decisions through the calculations that your broker is doing," says bob sutor, an ibm research vice president tasked with driving the quantum computing ecosystem.
ibm, with 15 deployed quantum systems, is at the forefront of quantum computing.
u.s. today recently got to tour a quantum lab in yorktown heights, new york.
but google, amazon, intel, microsoft and honeywell are among other tech stalwarts working in the field, as are several venture-backed global startups.
the u.s. government, which is in a quantum race against china, has also lent support.
in late 2018, president trump signed the national quantum initiative act into law to fund quantum research to the tune of $1.2 billion over a five-year period.
here is a guide to help demystify quantum computing, which you will almost certainly hear a lot more about in the years ahead.
what is quantum computing?
it isn't easy to get a grip around quantum computing or the field of physics it harnesses, quantum mechanics.
but such machines—they cost millions—are designed to model nature.
in the simplest terms, they are exponentially more powerful than what we consider classical computers, whose basic fundamental units are expressed in 1s or 0s—or bits.
quantum computing takes a quantum leap with what are known as quantum bits or "qubits" for short.
think about it this way: if you flip a coin, it will land as either heads or tails, or in those classical computer terms, 1s and 0s.
but what's the state of that coin when it is still spinning?
that's kind of where qubits are, not necessarily as a 1 or a 0, but as all the possibilities in between.
now let's take the analogy further.
if you flip two coins in the physical world, the heads or tails of one coin has no bearing on the other.
qubits, though, can be entangled in multiple states at the same time.
"this is one of those the "earth is not flat' kind of moments," gil says.
"there is actually a revolution going on."
what quantum computers look like
a quantum computer chip is kept at a temperature that's colder than outer space in a cylinder that's part of an elaborate refrigerated apparatus.
the system has more than 2,000 components, including pulse tube coolers, superconducting coaxial lines, a mixing chamber and various circuits.
it resembles a fancy chandelier.
how far along is quantum computing?
in may 2016, ibm became the first company to put a quantum computer on the cloud, where anyone with the computing know-how could run experiments.
currently, more than 150 billion programs and executions have been run on ibm's quantum machines, by more than 200,000 registered users in over 140 countries.
there are over 12,000 monthly active users, and, on a typical day, the machines on the cloud run over 400 million quantum circuits.
ibm says it has signed contracts around quantum with more than 100 universities, national laboratories and companies.
for example, quantum researchers at ibm are teaming up with counterparts at mercedes-benz parent daimler to develop next-generation batteries for electric vehicles.
ibm is also partnering with delta air lines to explore quantum opportunities in the travel business.
this past october, google said it achieved what's been described as "quantum supremacy."
it was able to perform a calculation in 200 seconds that supposedly would take a classic state-of-the-art supercomputer about 10,000 years to handle.
ibm pushed back.
the company argued at the time that an ideal simulation of the same task can be performed on a classical system in 2 1/2 days and with far greater fidelity, which at that it said was a conservative, worst-case estimate.
gil told u.s. today that "people are not making a distinction of what's a lab experiment, versus what is a real system."
the claims around quantum computing keep coming.
just this week, honeywell announced what it said is "the most powerful quantum computer yet," set for a mid-2020 release.
honeywell has formed a strategic partnership with jpmorgan chase around financial solutions that exploit quantum.
jpmorgan is also part of the ibm quantum ecosystem.
but these are still early days.
gil says quantum computing today is in roughly the same spot where artificial intelligence was in 2010.
his ibm colleague sutor says, "just to be clear, nobody on the planet has a quantum computer that can today do better that our classical computers."
but ibm says it can double the power of a quantum computer every year, and at some point cross a threshold at which the quantum machines might leap past classical computers, at least to address certain types of problems.
are there security risks?
there could be.
large future "fault-tolerant" quantum computers—and such computers are not yet around the corner—have the potential to crack current encryption systems.
ibm is working with the national institute of standards and technology (nist) on changing encryption standards that promise to keep quantum systems efficient while at the same time keeping them secure.
though security threats might be years away, gil stresses the urgency to prepare now.
"you cannot just sit and ignore the problem," gil says.
even years from now, you shouldn't expect to have a quantum computer sitting on your desk.
but the technology made possible by quantum computers will start to insert itself into supporting and making consumer apps more powerful.
and society would benefit if quantum computers can stop a potential pandemic before it ever really gets started.
"nature itself is one great big computer," sutor says, in the way atoms and molecules and light interact.
"can we learn enough about how it really does it and harness it for our own computing needs with the toughest sort of problems we have?"
ibm has not only released a 5-qubit quantum computer, but you can program it yourself on the cloud.
ibm has developed a 5-qubit quantum computer—and you can give it a whirl online.
quantum computing has been the unicorn of computer research for a while now.
it may be able to solve complex problems that today's computers would take hundreds of thousands of years to solve.
recently, ibm has recently taken a rather large step towards making quantum computing a reality in the form of their new 5-qubit, or quantum bit, processor.
to understand what 5 qubits means in the grand scheme of quantum computing, consider this: dario gil, vice president of science and solutions at ibm research, says that it would be impossible for any classical computer to emulate what a 50-qubit quantum system could accomplish.
the innovation doesn't stop there.
ibm also connected their new processor to the cloud so that anyone can test it out.
in the long climb to having a common place quantum computer, this is one of the first concrete steps to widespread use of quantum computing.
what is quantum computing?
if you don't already understand about conventional computers and digital logic, check these out before reading the rest of the article.
the first large difference between quantum computing and classic computing is the base unit of logic operations, which is the qubit.
a qubit is different than a traditional bit in that it utilizes quantum mechanics to do operations.
superposition, or being in two states at once, is a normal state for a qubit to exhibit.
a more conventional way of thinking about superposition is to imagine a bit being both a 1 and a 0 at the same moment in time.
superposition is one of the key ingredients of a quantum computer; this leads to being able to solve some extremely complex problems by being able to account for every single possibility.
one somewhat scary example is that a quantum computer could be able to brute force passwords that would take conventional computers millennia to crack—in a few hours or even minutes.
there are vast complexities of physics behind quantum machines, but luckily ibm has not only given us a tutorial for their computer, but also a general background for learning more about quantum computers which can be found here.
ibm.
quantum gates
since we are now looking at quantum bits, we also then get some quantum gates.
these function in principle the same way traditional logic gates do, but they also incorporate some properties to fully use the properties of these qubits.
one such gate is the cnot, also the first quantum gate ibm introduces in its tutorial.
it stands for "controlled not" and, as the name implies, uses one qubit to influence the other.
in classical computing, this is almost the same as an xor gate in terms of the logic table.
if you'd like to learn more about advances in quantum logic gates, read about oxford university's quantum logic gate with 99.9% precision.
using ibm's quantum composer
this can all be tested out in the quantum composer, which can be either a simulation of a quantum computer or the actual thing.
no, you didn't read that wrong.
you, dear reader, can program and run a quantum computer!
well, you can run the 5-bit processor and do limited operations.
as there is only one computer to run everyone's commands on, your experiments with the cloud-based processor will sit in a queue for up to 24 hours.
ibm then looks at the results and gives two options for looking at the data: a normal histogram and their quantum sphere representation or qsphere.​
ibm.
quantum computing for quantum issues
we can't know for certain the true capabilities of a quantum computer until we've built one.
however, experts have already been speculating about the kinds of issues that quantum computers could help solve.
simulations of the universe are some of the most difficult tasks that classical computers are asked to run.
as the amounts of specific details in these simulations increase, however, classical computers begin to struggle.
quantum computers are able to simulate more of the universe by exploiting their inherent properties of quantum physics.
quantum parallelism allows a quantum computer to simulate multiple processes at once.
quantum parallelism, unlike classical parallelism, is capable of doing multiple classical operations at once by doing one operation on a qubit.
this is one of the properties of quantum mechanics that many people find counterintuitive.
another way to understand this is presented by jerry chow, the manager of the experimental quantum computing research team at ibm.
caffeine molecules, chow says, are so complex that classical computers can't simulate them with 1s and 0s (classic bits).
in effect, simulating caffeine in a program is a quantum problem suitable for quantum computers.
to this end, the creation of functioning quantum computers could allow for extraordinary advances in designing pharmaceuticals and treating diseases.
we will only begin to uncover more interesting ideas and potential solutions to be used with a quantum computer as we develop the technology.
the future is strange and bright, yet may be clarified with a computation with a quantum computer.
want to get started in your quantum computing experience?
click here to find out more!
need some inspiration?
check out this video of the quantum composer running an experiment on grover's search algorithm:
scientists and engineers from the universities of bristol and western australia have developed how to efficiently simulate a "quantum walk" on a new design for a primitive quantum computer.
quantum computers have significant potential to open entirely new directions for processing information and to overhaul the way that we think about and use the science of computation.
modern computers already play a huge role in society—they routinely handle and process vast amounts of data and solve calculations at an incredible rate.
however, there are some problems that they just cannot solve in a useful amount of time, no matter how fast they become.
the concept of a quantum computer aims to address this, exploring uncharted computation and solving at least some of these problems that classical computers cannot.
the study published today in nature communications, reports strong evidence that with this method something meaningful can already be seen with a primitive quantum computer that cannot be seen with a classical computer.
the very first steps towards this have been implemented in the lab in bristol.
dr ashley montanaro, lecturer in applied mathematics and epsrc fellow from the university of bristol's school of mathematics, said: "a quantum computer is a machine designed to use quantum mechanics to solve problems more efficiently than any possible classical computer.
"we know some algorithms that can run on such machines and it's an open and exciting challenge to find more.
but most of the quantum algorithms we know need to be run on a large-scale quantum computer to see a speed up."
building a large-scale quantum computer is one of the biggest engineering challenges today.
there's a growing worldwide effort to develop one and it needs substantial effort from a wide range of expertise - including as part of the uk national quantum technologies programme (uknqt).
the results could be tremendous, offering fast and cheap ways to design new materials and new pharmaceuticals.
but there is a field of research emerging now that can help accelerate understanding how quantum computers will work and how users can apply them.
examining the power of smaller, more primitive designs for quantum computers indicates that sooner than we thought, quantum machines could outperform the capabilities of classical computing for very specific tasks—"boson sampling" is a recent example that is driven by what is experimentally available very soon.
big questions researchers face include what can these primitive quantum processors do that is useful to someone and how sophisticated do they need to be.
the results published in today's paper help to answer this question, by looking at how to simulate particular kinds of a phenomenon called the quantum walk.
the quantum walk at first glance is abstract.
but it is the quantum mechanical version of very useful models such as brownian motion and the "drunken sailor's random walk".
the key difference is the particle in the quantum walk is endowed with the principle of quantum superposition.
this has enabled other researchers to show they are a new way to think about how full-scale quantum computers might operate and to create useful quantum algorithms.
xiaogang qiang, phd student in the school of physics who implemented the experiment, said: "it's like the particle can explore space in parallel.
this parallelism is key to quantum algorithms, based on quantum walks that search huge databases more efficiently than we can currently."
dr jonathan matthews, epsrc early career fellow and lecturer in the school of physics and the centre for quantum photonics, explained: "an exciting outcome of our work is that we may have found a new example of quantum walk physics that we can observe with a primitive quantum computer, that otherwise a classical computer could not see.
"these otherwise hidden properties have practical use, perhaps in helping to design more sophisticated quantum computers."
provided by university of bristol
imagine communicating with your bank, the irs or your doctor by way of an internet that was perfectly secure.
your most private data would be protected with absolute certainty and, better yet, if any bad actor were to try to eavesdrop you would know immediately.
such is the promise of secure quantum communication.
should quantum communication ever become the standard—if there is ever to be a quantum internet, for instance—technical challenges lie ahead.
among the most critical will be devices that can send and receive quantum data.
to that end, researchers at stanford university have created a novel quantum light source that might someday serve as the basis for quantum communication.
they explained their findings in a paper published by the journal nature photonics.
the physics of quantum communication is admittedly complex.
standard lasers are actually not useful for secure communication because they emit what is called “classical” light.
data eavesdroppers could extract any data being carried via classical light without detection.
in contrast, a quantum internet would be based on “quantum” light, in which a single unit of light—a single photon—cannot be measured without being destroyed.
therefore, an efficient source of quantum light would enable perfectly secure communication.
senior author jelena vuckovic, a professor of electrical engineering at stanford, has been working for years to develop various nanoscale lasers and quantum technologies that might help conventional computers communicate faster and more efficiently using light instead of electricity.
she and her team, including lead author kevin fischer, a doctoral candidate, realised that a modified nanoscale laser can be used to efficiently generate quantum light for quantum communication.
“the problem is that the quantum light is much weaker than the rest of the light coming from such a modified laser—it is difficult to pick up,” vuckovic said.
“so, we created a way to filter out the unwanted light, allowing us to read the quantum signal much better.”
the filtering works in a fashion similar to the way noise-canceling headphones operate, only with light, instead of sound.
with the headphones, a sensor actively gauges the frequency of relatively constant ambient sound—the rumble of traffic, the drone of an airplane engine, the thrum of a refrigerator—and produces a similar pattern, which can be used to cancel out the undesirable sound.
“some of the light coming back from the modified laser is like noise, preventing us from seeing the quantum light,” fischer said.
“we canceled it out to reveal and emphasise the quantum signal hidden beneath.”
vuckovic’s team adapted an interference technique borrowed from 1930s-era radio engineering to cancel the unwanted classical light.
they first figured out what the “noise” looks like and played it back.
by carefully adjusting how the canceling light and the classical light overlap, the unwanted light is canceled and the once-hidden quantum light is revealed.
“this is a very promising development,” vuckovic said.
“it provides us with a practical pathway to secure quantum communications.”
researchers from the tyndall national institute in cork have created micro-structures shaped like small pyramids that can create entangled photons.
does this mean that quantum computers are closer than we realize?
eve of quantum computing
quantum computers have been the stuff of science fiction for the past few decades.
in recent times, quantum computers have slowly become more of a reality with some machines successfully solving real world problems such as games and path finding algorithms.
but why are quantum computers so desired by tech firms and why is there so much research into the field?
silicon has been incredibly loyal to the tech world for the past 50 years, giving us the point contact transistor in 1947.
now, silicon is at the center of technology with computers, tablets, smartphones, the iot, and even everyday items.
in fact, you cannot walk down a city street without being in range of some wi-fi network or influence from a small silicon device.
however, silicon, for all its uses, has started to reach its maximum potential with moore’s law starting to fracture.
it has been estimated that within the next 10-15 years, transistor count will no longer increase at the expected rate and will eventually level off, attaining some maximum value.
when this happens, devices will not become more powerful thanks to transistor increase and this will directly impact how technology advances.
while there are some methods that can be employed to continue the trend in increasing computer power (such as the use of hardware solutions to increase software speed and more efficiently written code), they can only go so far.
other more exotic methods include the use of computers which are designed in a similar fashion to brains that can adapt to specific problems.
one computer design, however, is particularly sought after as it could increase computational power exponentially.
this computational power comes in the form of quantum computing.
many are mislead into believing that quantum computers will replace classical computing-based devices (i.e., just about every computer ever made)—this is a myth.
quantum computers, if introduced to the public, would work alongside classical devices as they are very good at solving specific problems.
for example, a quantum computer could be used to solve encryption algorithms much faster than classical computers but running a program like word or chrome would be better done on an intel i7 instead of a d-wave quantum computer.
the challenges of quantum computing
given all of the interest and research into quantum computers, why are they not currently available to the public or even to big businesses and tech companies?
the issue comes down to how quantum computers work and their requirements.
firstly, quantum devices typically require conditions that simply do not exist outside laboratories.
for example, such devices rely on superconductors which need to be kept extremely cold (as low as 0.02k).
secondly, materials that express quantum properties such as entanglement and superposition are needed.
attaining such materials has been achieved using many techniques including trapping silicon atoms in diamond to produce quantum emitters.
however, these techniques do not currently provide mass production capabilities, unlike silicon chips which can be made in the billions with relative ease.
one research team from the tyndall national institute have devised a method for creating structures that can produce entangled photons.
nanostructure pyramid photon emitters
using common semiconductor fabrication techniques and easily obtained materials, the team have created small pyramid structures called “dots” that can emit entangled photons in a specific direction.
what makes this research critical to quantum computers is the ability to direct the entangled photos while being able to control the emission via an external electrical source.
if classical computers are to interact with quantum computers, the two need to be able to communicate which is why it is imperative that quantum information can be generated using classical methods and then encoded back into electrical current.
quantum dot led cross-section.
image courtesy of roisin kelly, tyndall national institute, university college cork
the tiny pyramids are made using epitaxial growth (growth of a crystal structure on top of a pre-existing crystal layer), inside an inverted pyramid structure that is patterned using standard lithography on a 111 (crystal orientation) gaas substrate.
this production technique allows the pyramids to be manufactured by most (if not all) semiconductor manufacturers which is crucial for mass production.
it also allows for the devices to be designed on a piece of silicon that could also hold transistors and other components which brings quantum computers a step closer to being a reality.
the quantum leds.
image courtesy of tung-hsun chung, tyndall national institute, university college cork
read more
basic analysis of a quantum processor
record-breaking quantum logic gate
summary
the big step that these quantum dots represent is that they allow the control and production of particles that can be used for quantum computing and can easily be manufactured with current technology.
while the devices on their own cannot process quantum information, they could play a big part in future quantum devices.
whatever happens, it can be said that quantum power will be needed soon if silicon stagnates in the near future.
the market for quantum networking is projected to reach $5.5 billion by 2025, according to a new report from inside quantum technology (iqt).
while all computing systems rely on the ability to store and manipulate information in individual bits, quantum computers "leverage quantum mechanical phenomena to manipulate information" and to do so requires the use of quantum bits, or qubits, according to ibm.
see: quantum computing: an insider's guide (techrepublic)
quantum computing is seen as the panacea for solving the problems computers are not equipped to handle now.
"for problems above a certain size and complexity, we don't have enough computational power on earth to tackle them,'' ibm said.
this requires a new kind of computing, and this is where quantum comes in.
iqt says that quantum networking revenue comes primarily from quantum key distribution (qk), quantum cloud computing, and quantum sensor networks.
eventually, these strands will merge into a quantum internet, the report said.
cloud access to quantum computers is core to the business models of many leading quantum computer companies–such as ibm, microsoft and rigetti–as well as several leading academic institutions, according to the report.
microsoft, for instance, designed a special programming language for quantum computers, called q#, and released a quantum development kit to help programmers create new applications, according to cbinsights.
one of google's quantum computing projects involves working with nasa to apply the tech's optimization abilities to space travel.
the quantum internet network will have the same "geographical breadth of coverage as today's internet," the iqt report stated.
it will provide a powerful platform for communications among quantum computers and other quantum devices, the report said.
and will enable a quantum version of the internet of things.
"finally, quantum networks can be the most secure networks ever built – completely invulnerable if constructed properly," the report said.
the report, "quantum networks: a ten-year forecast and opportunity analysis," forecasts demand for quantum network equipment, software and services in both volume and value terms.
"the time has come when the rapidly developing quantum technology industry needs to quantify the opportunities coming out of quantum networking," said lawrence gasman, president of inside quantum technology, in a statement.
quantum key distribution (qkd) adds unbreakable coding of key distribution to public key encryption, making it virtually invulnerable, according to the report.
qkd is the first significant revenue source to come from the emerging quantum internet and will create almost $150 million in revenue in 2020, the report said.
qkd's early success is due to potential users—big financial and government organizations—have an immediate need for 100% secure encryption, the iqt report stated.
by 2025, iqt projects that revenue from "quantum clouds" are expected to exceed $2 billion.
although some large research and government organizations are buying quantum computers for on-premise use, the high cost of the machines coupled with the immaturity of the technology means that the majority of quantum users are accessing quantum through clouds, the report explained.
quantum sensor networks promise enhanced navigation and positioning and more sensitive medical imaging modalities, among other use cases, the report said.
"this is a very diverse area in terms of both the range of applications and the maturity of the technology."
however, by 2025 revenue from quantum sensors is expected to reach about $1.2 billion.
also see
researchers at sandia national laboratory, in conjunction with harvard university, have developed a method of joining quantum computers together on an atomic scale.
what does this mean for future quantum computers and their capabilities?
quantum computer joining
quantum computers have been featured in sensationalized news stories so often that announcements made about them are becoming stale.
while quantum computers have extraordinary potential for future computing, it is unlikely that they will see commercial use for a decade or two.
however, researchers at sandia national laboratory working with harvard university have developed and demonstrated a quantum bridge whereby two small quantum computational devices can communicate with each other on an atomic scale.
a brief explanation of quantum computing
in classical computation, data is represented as either off (0) or on (1) in binary units called bits.
this fact leads to the creation of logic gates which manipulate these bits to perform operations ranging from mathematical functions to bitwise comparisons.
for example, a microcontroller may compare two input pins and turn on a motor if the inputs are equal.
this requires the controller to perform a logical and on the inputs and bind the result to the motor control.
quantum computers, however, do not use discrete bits to represent information.
instead, quantum computers rely on the quantum nature of a particle (such as an electron, photon, or even an atom) to store a qubit.
the information that is stored in a qubit depends on its qubit state which is represented as a linear region with probabilities of either being a 0 or a 1.
it is easier to think of a qubit as having three states:
0 - off
1 - on
s - superposition
the bloch sphere is used to represent a qubit.
image courtesy of glosser.ca (own work) [cc by-sa 3.0]
one issue with qubits is that when they are directly read, their superposition state is lost.
in other words, if an atom is in a superposition state n and is read it will change to either a 1 or 0.
one method for reading qubits is by exploiting quantum entanglement where two particles are linked with each other.
the state of one particle is dependent on the state of the other and vice versa so, by reading one particle, you can infer what state the other particle is in.
quantum emitters and diamonds
one problem in quantum computing is getting two separate quantum computational devices to interact and transfer data.
quantum emitters are atoms that are “pumped” with photons which excite their electrons.
eventually, the excited electrons return to their previous energy state and emit a photon when they undergo this energy change.
the energy change represents quantum information that the quantum emitter contains which does not affect the quantum state of the emitter.
so now we have a qubit that can store quantum information and be read without losing its quantum state.
the next issue is how to fabricate and control individual qubits.
researchers at sandia in conjunction with harvard have developed a method of creating qubit in a way never seen before which exhibit exciting quantum properties.
for a qubit to be reliable, it must not be affected by external influences such as charge, fields, and forces.
the qubit must also be able to retain its quantum superposition when read so that information is not lost during operation.
lastly (from a manufacturing perspective), the qubit creation should be possible in controlled situations (instead of relying on chance).
read more
quantum physics - solid sate theory
fundamentals of quantum computing
to solve these issues, the researchers use a particle-ion beam to replace carbon atoms in a diamond with individual silicon atoms.
when a carbon atom in diamond is replaced with a single silicon atom, two neighbour carbon atoms begin to move away from the valance and eventually leave.
this gap enables the silicon to essentially float as if it were in a gas as well as being buffered from stray electrical current thanks to the non-conductive neighbour vacancies.
as the silicon is well below the surface of the diamond the silicon atom is kept within a specific location and is easily accessed by external photons.
representation of holes in diamond holding the silicon emitter.
image courtesy of sandia national laboratories.
the advantage of the ion beam is that normally the quantum emitters (silicon in diamond) are in the form of random defects that scientists had to locate.
not only are such emitters hard to find but not all work as expected.
the ion beam method produces thousands of reliable quantum bits which all yield working devices.
when these silicon atoms are pumped with photons, the emitted photons from the silicon atoms contain quantum information in their frequency, polarisation, and intensity.
future of quantum computers
the researchers behind the silicon emitters believe that quantum computers in the future will not consists of large powerful quantum devices but many simple quantum devices working in parallel.
such a device may be a better solution for the current rise in power demand from computers especially when making large generic q-bit quantum computers is difficult.
this use of parallelism is no surprise when considering modern processors.
in the past (intel 4004 onward), cpus became more powerful as they had more instructions and the ability to compute them faster than their predecessor.
but now, processor speed has slumped and is essentially no longer increasing (with an upper limit near 5ghz) yet computation is still becoming more powerful.
this is thanks to the use of parallel processing in modern computers where different processors handle different tasks simultaneously.
if large multi-qubit quantum computers are too difficult to produce on scale with current technology, then creating more simple devices but connecting many of them together may be a better alternative.
either way, there is no doubt that these quantum emitters could be the key to future quantum computational devices.
for 60 years computers have become smaller, faster and cheaper.
but engineers are approaching the limits of how small they can make silicon transistors and how quickly they can push electricity through devices to create digital ones and zeros.
that limitation is why stanford electrical engineering professor jelena vuckovic is looking to quantum computing, which is based on light rather than electricity.
quantum computers work by isolating spinning electrons inside a new type of semiconductor material.
when a laser strikes the electron, it reveals which way it is spinning by emitting one or more quanta, or particles, of light.
those spin states replace the ones and zeros of traditional computing.
vuckovic, who is one of the world’s leading researchers in the field, said quantum computing is ideal for studying biological systems, doing cryptography or data mining – in fact, solving any problem with many variables.
“when people talk about finding a needle in a haystack, that’s where quantum computing comes in,” she said.
marina radulaski, a postdoctoral fellow in vuckovic’s lab, said the problem-solving potential of quantum computers stems from the complexity of the laser-electron interactions at the core of the concept.
“with electronics you have zeros and ones,” radulaski said.
“but when the laser hits the electron in a quantum system, it creates many possible spin states, and that greater range of possibilities forms the basis for more complex computing.”
harnessing information based on the interactions of light and electrons is easier said than done.
some of the world’s leading technology companies are trying to build massive quantum computers that rely on materials super-cooled to near absolute zero, the theoretical temperature at which atoms would cease to move.
in her own studies of nearly 20 years, vuckovic has focused on one aspect of the challenge: creating new types of quantum computer chips that would become the building blocks of future systems.
“to fully realise the promise of quantum computing we will have to develop technologies that can operate in normal environments,” she said.
“the materials we are exploring bring us closer toward finding tomorrow’s quantum processor.”
the challenge for vuckovic’s team is developing materials that can trap a single, isolated electron.
working with collaborators worldwide, they have recently tested three different approaches to the problem, one of which can operate at room temperature – a critical step if quantum computing is going to become a practical tool.
in all three cases the group started with semiconductor crystals, material with a regular atomic lattice like the girders of a skyscraper.
by slightly altering this lattice, they sought to create a structure in which the atomic forces exerted by the material could confine a spinning electron.
“we are trying to develop the basic working unit of a quantum chip, the equivalent of the transistor on a silicon chip,” vuckovic said.
one way to create this laser-electron interaction chamber is through a structure known as a quantum dot.
physically, the quantum dot is a small amount of indium arsenide inside a crystal of gallium arsenide.
the atomic properties of the two materials are known to trap a spinning electron.
in a recent paper in nature physics, kevin fischer, a graduate student in the vuckovic lab, describes how the laser-electron processes can be exploited within such a quantum dot to control the input and output of light.
by sending more laser power to the quantum dot, the researchers could force it to emit exactly two photons rather than one.
they say the quantum dot has practical advantages over other leading quantum computing platforms but still requires cryogenic cooling, so it may not be useful for general-purpose computing.
however, it could have applications in creating tamper-proof communications networks.
in two other papers vuckovic took a different approach to electron capture, by modifying a single crystal to trap light in what is called a colour center.
in a recent paper published in nanoletters, her team focused on colour centers in diamond.
in nature the crystalline lattice of a diamond consists of carbon atoms.
jingyuan linda zhang, a graduate student in vuckovic’s lab, described how a 16-member research team replaced some of those carbon atoms with silicon atoms.
this one alteration created colour centers that effectively trapped spinning electrons in the diamond lattice.
but like the quantum dot, most diamond colour center experiments require cryogenic cooling.
though that is an improvement over other approaches that required even more elaborate cooling, vuckovic wanted to do better.
so she worked with another global team to experiment with a third material, silicon carbide.
commonly known as carborundum, silicon carbide is a hard, transparent crystal used to make clutch plates, brake pads and bulletproof vests.
prior research had shown that silicon carbide could be modified to create colour centers at room temperature.
but this potential had not yet been made efficient enough to yield a quantum chip.
vuckovic’s team knocked certain silicon atoms out of the silicon carbide lattice in a way that created highly efficient colour centers.
they also fabricated nanowire structures around the colour centers to improve the extraction of photons.
radulaski was the first author on that experiment, which is described in another nanoletters paper.
she said the net results – an efficient colour center, operating at room temperature, in a material familiar to industry – were huge pluses.
“we think we’ve demonstrated a practical approach to making a quantum chip,” radulaski said.
but the field is still in its early days and electron tapping is no simple feat.
even the researchers aren’t sure which method or methods will win out.
“we don’t know yet which approach is best, so we continue to experiment,” vuckovic said.
a discovery by physicists at uc santa barbara may earn silicon carbide -- a semiconductor commonly used by the electronics industry -- a role at the center of a new generation of information technologies designed to exploit quantum physics for tasks such as ultrafast computing and nanoscale sensing.
the research team discovered that silicon carbide contains crystal imperfections that can be controlled at a quantum mechanical level.
the finding is published this week in the journal nature.
the research group of david awschalom, senior author, made the finding.
awschalom is director of ucsb's center for spintronics & quantum computation, professor of physics, electrical and computer engineering, and the peter j. clarke director of the california nanosystems institute.
in conventional semiconductor-based electronic devices, crystal defects are often deemed undesirable because of their tendency to immobilize electrons by "trapping" them at a particular crystal location.
however, the ucsb team discovered that electrons that become trapped by certain imperfections in silicon carbide do so in a way that allows their quantum states to be initialized, precisely manipulated, and measured using a combination of light and microwave radiation.
this means that each of these defects meets the requirements for use as a quantum bit, or "qubit," which is often described as the quantum mechanical analog of a transistor, since it is the basic unit of a quantum computer.
"we are looking for the beauty and utility in imperfection, rather than struggling to bring about perfect order," said awschalom, "and to use these defects as the basis for a future quantum technology."
most crystal imperfections do not possess these properties, which are intimately tied to the atomic structure of a defect and the electronic characteristics of its semiconductor host, explained awschalom.
in fact, before this research, the only system known to possess these same characteristics was a flaw in diamond known as the nitrogen-vacancy center.
the diamond nitrogen-vacancy center is renowned for its ability to function as a qubit at room temperature, while many other quantum states of matter require an extremely cold temperature, near absolute zero.
however, this center exists in a material that is difficult to grow and challenging to manufacture into integrated circuits.
in contrast, high-quality crystals of silicon carbide, multiple inches in diameter, are commonly produced for commercial purposes.
they can be readily fashioned into a multitude of intricate electronic, optoelectronic, and electromechanical devices.
in addition, the defects studied by awschalom and his group are addressed using infrared light that is close in energy to the light used widely throughout modern telecommunications networks.
and while several distinct defect types were studied at a range of temperatures, two of them were capable of room temperature operation, just like the diamond nitrogen-vacancy center.
the combination of these features makes silicon carbide, with its defects, an attractive candidate for future work seeking to integrate quantum mechanical objects with sophisticated electronic and optical circuitry, according to the researchers.
this research fits within a wider effort at ucsb to engineer quantum devices by fostering collaboration between the fields of materials science and quantum physics.
while defects in silicon carbide may offer many technologically attractive qualities, an immense number of defects in other semiconductors are still left to be explored.
"our dream is to make quantum mechanics fully engineerable," said william koehl, lead author and a graduate student in the awschalom lab.
"much like a civil engineer is able to design a bridge based on factors such as load capacity and length span, we'd like to see a day when there are quantum engineers who can design a quantum electronic device based on specifications such as degree of quantum entanglement and quality of interaction with the surrounding environment."
provided by university of california - santa barbara
quantum computing -- considered to be the next generation of high-performance computing -- is a rapidly-changing field that receives equal parts attention in academia and in enterprise research labs.
presently, google, ibm, and intel are independently developing their own implementations of quantum computers, as are startups such as d-wave systems.
techrepublic's cheat sheet for quantum computing is positioned both as an easily digestable introduction to a new paradigm of computing, as well as a "living" guide that will be updated periodically to keep it leaders informed on advances in the science and commercialization of quantum computing.
see: ebook--it leader's guide to the future of quantum computing (tech pro research)
executive summary
what is quantum computing?
quantum computing is a developing technology, which scientists anticipate will provide faster computational solutions to problems currently handled by supercomputers.
why does quantum computing matter?
theoretically, quantum computers could be used to crack rsa cryptography, which is commonly used across the internet.
who does quantum computing affect?
presently, primarily researchers working in quantum physics, though advances in quantum computing are anticipated to influence other "fuzzy logic" disciplines, such as artificial intelligence and machine learning.
when will quantum computers be released?
systems limited to a specific type of quantum computation called digital annealing are commercially available, though there is not yet a clear benefit compared to traditional computers.
how do i get a quantum computer?
multiple vendors offer cloud-based access to quantum computers.
even though purchasing a system outright is possible, it is likely cost prohibitive, as current systems are only useful for specialized workloads.
see: all of techrepublic's cheat sheets and smart person's guides
what is quantum computing?
quantum computing is an emerging technology that attempts to overcome limitations inherent to traditional, transistor-based computers.
transistor-based computers rely on the encoding of data in binary bits--either 0 or 1.
quantum computers utilize qubits, which have different operational properties.
while it is possible to encode binary data in a qubit, the natural state of a qubit is essentially superposition.
this property allows qubits to have values of 0 and 1 (or values between 0 and 1) simultaneously.
likewise, because of the properties of quantum physics, multiple measurements of qubits in identical states will not return identical results.
qubits can also contain up to two bits of binary data as part of a process called superdense coding.
using quantum computation, mathematically complex tasks that are at present typically handled by supercomputers -- protein folding, for example -- can theoretically be performed by quantum computers at a lower energy cost than transistor-based supercomputers.
while current quantum machines are essentially proof-of-concept devices, the algorithms which would be used on production-ready machines are being tested presently, to ensure that the results are predictable and reproducible.
at the current stage of development, a given problem can be solved by both quantum and traditional (binary) computers.
as manufacturing processes used to build quantum computers is refined, it is anticipated that they will become faster at computational tasks than traditional, binary computers.
further, quantum supremacy is the threshold at which quantum computers are theorized to be capable of solving problems, which traditional computers would not (practically) be able to solve.
practically speaking, quantum supremacy would provide a superpolynomial speed increase over the best known (or possible) algorithm designed for traditional computers.
theoretically, this can be demonstrated using shor's algorithm for prime factorization, which would provide such a speed increase when performed on a quantum computer, as factoring is thought to be generally hard with traditional computers (though, this is not proven, in the scientific sense of "proof").
a research paper published in science in october 2018 titled "quantum advantage with shallow circuits" tested a variant of the bernstein-vazirani problem, in which researchers proved that a quantum computer with a fixed circuit depth will outperform a classical computer used to compute the same problem.
while this does not itself establish quantum supremacy, it does demonstrate the potential of quantum computers as refined designs increase the number of qubits, and the length of quantum coherence, allowing for more complex calculations to be performed.
additional resources:
why does quantum computing matter?
theoretically, advancements in quantum computing would lead to a breakthrough in integer factorization.
if integer factorization became trivial to perform, the integrity of commonly used encryption systems would be shattered, allowing any individual, organization, or government with access to quantum computers the ability to brute-force decryption keys, with which locked devices or encrypted archives can be made accessible.
because of concerns in the cybersecurity community about the viability of quantum computers in breaking encryption, research into lattice-based cryptography -- which is thought to not be susceptible to being broken by quantum computers -- has increased.
to that end, on january 2014, reports indicated that the nsa has spent $79.7 million on a program titled "penetrating hard targets."
as part of this program, research was conducted to build "a cryptologically useful quantum computer."
the documents cited in this report indicate that the nsa has not been appreciably more successful than other researchers.
likewise, the national institute of standards and technology (nist) published a request in december 2016 asking for public input on how to protect computers from the threat of quantum computers being used to crack encryption.
there is no consensus on when quantum computers will be capable of cracking encryption.
in a may 2018 interview with techrepublic, bob sutor, ibm research's vice president of cognitive, blockchain, and quantum solutions, estimated that quantum computers are 30-40 years away from breaking traditional cryptographic algorithms.
the same month, ibm research director arvind krishna warned that "anyone that wants to make sure that their data is protected for longer than 10 years should move to alternate forms of encryption now."
quantum computing is also anticipated to have other meaningful impacts outside of the field of cryptography.
because of the nature of quantum computation, they are uniquely well suited to so-called "optimization problems," where an exponential number of permutations to evaluate exist.
in an interview with techrepublic's nick heath, andy stanford clark, ibm cto for uk and ireland provided an example: "if... you're optimizing the lengths of aircraft routes, or optimizing the layout of spare parts for a rail network, something where there's 2n possibilities and you've got to try each out in order to find the optimal solution.
if you had a 2100 problem, which would be basically impossible to solve on a classical computer, with a 100-qubit quantum computer, you'd be able to solve it in one operation."
additional resources:
who does quantum computing affect?
research into quantum computing is driving a great deal of investment from universities, it companies, and venture capital.
multiple public-private partnerships have sprung up as businesses work with research departments in universities to find use cases where quantum computing can be applied to existing business operations.
the ibm q network is the largest of these, with participating universities including north carolina state university, melbourne university, oxford university, and keio university, and participating companies including samsung, jpmorgan chase, mitsubishi ufj financial group, mizuho financial group, and mitsubishi chemical.
others include a collaboration between the australian firm silicon quantum computing, and france's national research and development (r&d) organization, the commissariat à l'energie atomique et aux energies alternatives (cea).
additional resources:
when will quantum computers be available?
there are two answers to this question: now, and substantially far in the future.
the canadian company d-wave systems currently sells a quantum computer named the d-wave 2000q, however, there are significant caveats with that offering.
d-wave advertises this system as having 2000 qubits, though differences in d-wave's definition of qubit relative to the rest of the quantum computing industry make this measurement not practically useful.
further, the systems sold by d-wave are designed specifically for quadratic unconstrained binary optimization, making them unsuitable for integer factorization required for cracking rsa encryption systems.
additionally, the d-wave 2 (second-generation system) was found to not be faster than a traditional computer.
for more information on how d-wave products differ from other quantum computers, techrepublic has a separate cheat sheet for d-wave's quantum computer technology.
likewise, fujitsu offers a "quantum inspired" digital annealer, which is a traditional transistor-based computer designed for quantum annealing tasks, like d-wave's quantum computer.
however, fujitsu does not market this system as a true quantum computer, as the traditional transistor-based design allows it to operate at room temperature without requiring helium-based cooling solutions, as well as making it resistant to noise and environmental conditions which impact performance in quantum computers.
in a general sense, it is possible that quantum computing may be a viable alternative in the future to current transistor-based solutions, though non-trivial encumbrances in fabrication and mass-manufacturing must be addressed for this to become a viable technology for mass industry adoption.
among these encumbrances are the difficulty of building computers which scale to multiple qubits, the ability to initialize qubits to a predictable value, and easing the means by which qubits can be read.
additional resources:
google's quantum computer can blitz a normal pc - but it's not ready for production just yet (zdnet)
how do i get a quantum computer?
quantum computing resources are widely available via cloud services, with vendor-specific frameworks.
presently, offerings are available from ibm q (via qiskit), while google has introduced the cirq framework, though it does not presently have a cloud offering in general availability.
d-wave leap allows approved developers to conduct quantum experiments for free.
similarly, fujitsu offers cloud access to their digital annealer system.
for buying systems outright, d-wave's 2000q system costs $15 million (notable buyers include volkswagen group and virginia tech.).
a quantum computer is not something you are likely to find at your local big-box store.
however, if your workloads are more general, building and buying a power9 deployment is likely a better value at present.
oak ridge national laboratory's summit supercomputer is a power9 and nvidia volta-driven system planned at 4600 nodes, with a computational performance in excess of 40 teraflops per node.
also see
for years, physicists have been heralding the revolutionary potential of using quantum mechanics to build a new generation of supercomputers, unbreakable codes, and ultra-fast and secure communication networks.
the brave new world of quantum technology may be a big step closer to reality thanks to a team of university of calgary researchers that has come up with a unique new way of testing quantum devices to determine their function and accuracy.
their breakthrough is reported in today's edition of science express, the advanced online publication of the prestigious journal science.
"building quantum machines is difficult because they are very complex, therefore the testing you need to do is also very complex," said barry sanders, director of the u of c's institute for quantum information science and a co-author of the paper.
"we broke a bunch of taboos with this work because we have come up with an entirely new way of testing that is relatively simple and doesn't require a lot of large and expensive diagnostic equipment."
similar to any electronic or mechanical device, building a quantum machine requires a thorough understanding of how each part operates and interacts with other parts if the finished product is going to work properly.
in the quantum realm, scientists have been struggling to find ways to accurately determine the properties of individual components as they work towards creating useful quantum systems.
the u of c team has come up with a highly-accurate method for analyzing quantum optical processes using standard optical techniques involving lasers and lenses.
"it is a completely different approach to quantum characterization than we have seen before," said post-doctoral researcher mirko lobino, the paper's lead author.
"this process will be able to tell us if something is working correctly and will hopefully lead the way towards a quantum certification process as we move from quantum science to making quantum technology."
the development of quantum computers is considered the next major advancement in computer processing and memory power but is still in its infancy.
unlike regular silicon-based computers that transmit information in binary units (bits) using 1 and 0, quantum computers use the subatomic physical processes of quantum mechanics to transmit information in quantum bits (qubits) that can exist in more than two states.
computers based on quantum physics are predicted to be far more powerful than computers based on classical physics and could break many of the most advanced codes currently used to secure digital information.
quantum physics is also being used to try and create new, unbreakable encryption systems.
the same research group at the u of c, led by physics professor alexander lvovsky, made headlines earlier this year when they were one of two teams to independently prove it's possible to store a special kind of light, called a "squeezed vacuum."
that work is considered the initial step towards creating memory systems for quantum computing.
source: university of calgary
a silicon-based quantum computing device could be closer than ever due to a new experimental device that demonstrates the potential to use light as a messenger to connect quantum bits of information — known as qubits — that are not immediately adjacent to each other.
the feat is a step toward making quantum computing devices from silicon, the same material used in today’s smartphones and computers.
in a step forward for quantum computing in silicon — the same material used in today’s computers — researchers successfully coupled a single electron’s spin, represented by the dot on the left, to light, represented as a wave crossing over the double-welled silicon chamber, known as a quantum dot, where the electron is trapped.
the goal is to use light as a messenger to convey the quantum information to other locations on a futuristic quantum computing chip.
the research, published in the journal nature, was led by researchers at princeton university in collaboration with colleagues at the university of konstanz in germany and the joint quantum institute, which is a partnership of the university of maryland and the national institute of standards and technology.
the team created qubits from single electrons trapped in silicon chambers known as double quantum dots.
by applying a magnetic field, they showed they could transfer quantum information, encoded in the electron property known as spin, to a particle of light, or photon, opening the possibility of transmitting the quantum information.
“this is a breakout year for silicon spin qubits,” said jason petta, professor of physics at princeton.
“this work expands our efforts in a whole new direction, because it takes you out of living in a two-dimensional landscape, where you can only do nearest-neighbor coupling, and into a world of all-to-all connectivity,” he said.
“that creates flexibility in how we make our devices.”
quantum devices offer computational possibilities that are not possible with today’s computers, such as factoring large numbers and simulating chemical reactions.
unlike conventional computers, the devices operate according to the quantum mechanical laws that govern very small structures such as single atoms and sub-atomic particles.
major technology firms are already building quantum computers based on superconducting qubits and other approaches.
“this result provides a path to scaling up to more complex systems following the recipe of the semiconductor industry,” said guido burkard, professor of physics at the university of konstanz, who provided guidance on theoretical aspects in collaboration with mónica benito, a postdoctoral researcher.
“that is the vision, and this is a very important step.”
jacob taylor, a member of the team and a fellow at the joint quantum institute, likened the light to a wire that can connect spin qubits.
“if you want to make a quantum computing device using these trapped electrons, how do you send information around on the chip?
you need the quantum computing equivalent of a wire.”
silicon spin qubits are more resilient than competing qubit technologies to outside disturbances such as heat and vibrations, which disrupt inherently fragile quantum states.
the simple act of reading out the results of a quantum calculation can destroy the quantum state, a phenomenon known as “quantum demolition.”
the researchers theorise that the current approach may avoid this problem because it uses light to probe the state of the quantum system.
light is already used as a messenger to bring cable and internet signals into homes via fiber optic cables, and it is also being used to connect superconducting qubit systems, but this is one of the first applications in silicon spin qubits.
in these qubits, information is represented by the electron’s spin, which can point up or down.
for example, a spin pointing up could represent a 0 and a spin pointing down could represent a 1.
conventional computers, in contrast, use the electron’s charge to encode information.
connecting silicon-based qubits so that they can talk to each other without destroying their information has been a challenge for the field.
although the princeton-led team successfully coupled two neighboring electron spins separated by only 100 nanometers (100 billionths of a meter), as published in science, coupling spin to light, which would enable long-distance spin-spin coupling, has remained a challenge until now.
in the current study, the team solved the problem of long-distance communication by coupling the qubit’s information — that is, whether the spin points up or down — to a particle of light, or photon, which is trapped above the qubit in the chamber.
the photon’s wave-like nature allows it to oscillate above the qubit like an undulating cloud.
graduate student xiao mi and colleagues figured out how to link the information about the spin’s direction to the photon, so that the light can pick up a message, such as “spin points up,” from the qubit.
“the strong coupling of a single spin to a single photon is an extraordinarily difficult task akin to a perfectly choreographed dance,” mi said.
“the interaction between the participants — spin, charge and photon — needs to be precisely engineered and protected from environmental noise, which has not been possible until now.” the team at princeton included postdoctoral fellow stefan putz and graduate student david zajac.
the advance was made possible by tapping into light’s electromagnetic wave properties.
light consists of oscillating electric and magnetic fields, and the researchers succeeded in coupling the light’s electric field to the electron’s spin state.
the researchers did so by building on team’s finding published in the journal science that demonstrated coupling between a single electron charge and a single particle of light.
to coax the qubit to transmit its spin state to the photon, the researchers place the electron spin in a large magnetic field gradient such that the electron spin has a different orientation depending on which side of the quantum dot it occupies.
the magnetic field gradient, combined with the charge coupling demonstrated by the group in 2016, couples the qubit’s spin direction to the photon’s electric field.
ideally, the photon will then deliver the message to another qubit located within the chamber.
another possibility is that the photon’s message could be carried through wires to a device that reads out the message.
the researchers are working on these next steps in the process.
several steps are still needed before making a silicon-based quantum computer, petta said.
everyday computers process billions of bits, and although qubits are more computationally powerful, most experts agree that 50 or more qubits are needed to achieve quantum supremacy, where quantum computers would start to outshine their classical counterparts.
discover more here.
image credit: princeton university.
quantum computing harnesses enigmatic properties of small particles to process complex information.
but quantum systems are fragile and error-prone, and useful quantum computers have yet to come to fruition.
researchers in the quantum dynamics unit at the okinawa institute of science and technology graduate university (oist) devised a new method -- called image charge detection -- to detect electrons' transitions to quantum states.
electrons can serve as quantum bits, the smallest unit of quantum information; these bits are foundational to larger computational systems.
quantum computers may be used to understand the mechanism of superconductivity, cryptography, artificial intelligence, among other applications.
"there is a huge gap between controlling few quantum bits and building a quantum computer," said dr. erika kawakami, the lead author of a new study, published in physical review letters with editor's suggestion.
"with the current state-of-art quantum bits, a quantum computer would need to be the size of a football field.
our new approach could potentially create a ten-centimeter chip."
a new potential for electrons on helium
electrons need to be immobilized to serve as quantum bits; otherwise they move freely.
to create an electron-capturing system, the researchers used liquid helium, which liquefies at cold temperatures, as a substrate.
since helium is free of impurities, these electrons are expected to retain quantum states longer than in any other materials, which is important for realizing a quantum computer.
prof. denis konstantinov and his collaborators, kawakami and dr. asem elarabi, placed a parallel-plate capacitor inside of a copper cell cooled to 0.2 degrees kelvin (-272.8 degrees celsius) and filled with condensed liquid helium.
electrons generated by a tungsten filament sat atop the liquid helium's surface, between the two capacitor plates.
then, microwave radiation introduced into the copper cell excited electrons' quantum states, causing the electrons to move away from the bottom capacitor plate and come closer to the top capacitor plate.
the researchers confirmed the excitation of quantum states by observing an electrostatic phenomenon called image charge.
like a reflection in a mirror, image charge precisely reflects the movement of electrons.
if an electron moves further from the capacitor plate, then the image charge moves alongside it.
moving forward, the researchers hope to use this image charge detection to measure an individual electron's spin state, or quantum orbital state, without disrupting the integrity of the quantum systems.
"currently, we can detect the quantum states of an ensemble of many electrons," konstantinov said.
"the strong point of this new method is that we can scale down this technique to a single electron and to use it as a quantum bit."
an international research group of scientists and engineers led by the university of bristol, uk, has made an important advance towards a quantum computer by shrinking down key components and integrating them onto a silicon microchip.
engineers from an international collaboration led by dr mark thompson from the university of bristol have, for the first time, generated and manipulated single particles of light (photons) on a silicon chip – a major step forward in the race to build a quantum computer.
quantum computers and quantum technologies in general are widely anticipated as the next major technology advancement, and are poised to replace conventional information and computing devices in applications ranging from ultra-secure communications and high-precision sensing to immensely powerful computers.
quantum computers themselves will likely lead to breakthroughs in the design of new materials and in the discovery of new medical drugs.
whilst still in their infancy, quantum technologies are making rapid process, and a revolutionary new approach pioneered by the university of bristol is exploiting state-of-the-art engineering processes and principles to make leaps and bounds in a field previously dominated by scientists.
featuring on the front cover of nature photonics, this latest advancement is one of the important pieces in the jigsaw needed in order to realise a quantum computer.
while previous attempts have required external light sources to generate the photons, this new chip integrates components that can generate photons inside the chip.
“we were surprised by how well the integrated sources performed together,” admits joshua silverstone, lead author of the paper.
“they produced high-quality identical photons in a reproducible way, confirming that we could one day manufacture a silicon chip with hundreds of similar sources on it, all working together.
this could eventually lead to an optical quantum computer capable of performing enormously complex calculations.”
group leader mark thompson explained: “single-photon detectors, sources and circuits have all been developed separately in silicon but putting them all together and integrating them on a chip is a huge challenge.
our device is the most functionally complex photonic quantum circuit to date, and was fabricated by toshiba using exactly the same manufacturing techniques used to make conventional electronic devices.
we can generate and manipulate quantum entanglement all within a single mm-sized micro-chip.”
the group, which, includes researchers from toshiba corporation (japan), stanford university (us), university of glasgow (uk) and tu delft (the netherlands), now plans to integrate the remaining necessary components onto a chip, and show that large-scale quantum devices using photons are possible.
“our group has been making steady progress towards a functioning quantum computer over the last five years,” said thompson.
“we hope to have within the next couple of years, photon-based devices complex enough to rival modern computing hardware for highly-specialised tasks.”
however, these are just the first steps.
to realise useful quantum machines will required a new breed of engineering – quantum engineers, individuals capable of understanding the fundamentals of quantum mechanics and applying this knowledge to real world problems.
bristol’s newly established centre for doctoral training in quantum engineering will train a new generation of engineers, scientists and entrepreneurs to harness the power of quantum mechanics and lead the quantum technology revolution.
this innovative centre bridges the gaps between physics, engineering, mathematics and computer science, working closely with chemists and biologists while interacting strongly with industry.
measuring the computational ability of quantum computers is—as is anything involving quantum systems—a complex problem.
counting the number of qubits in a quantum computer to determine computational power is too simplistic to be functionally useful—differences in how individual qubits are connected, how the qubits themselves are designed, and environmental factors make this type of comparison inequitable.
for example, d-wave is planning to launch a 5,000-qubit system for cloud-based access in mid-2020.
google, for contrast, has a 72-qubit quantum computer called "bristlecone" and ibm's q system one is a 20-qubit design.
differences in how these qubits are designed and connected make cross-vendor comparisons unreliable—while d-wave's upcoming 5,000-qubit system will undoubtedly be more capable than its current-generation 2,000-qubit system, it is not necessarily better than ibm's designs, or google's prototypes.
further, d-wave's design is a quantum annealer, useful for a single type of calculation called "quadratic unconstrained binary optimization (qubo)."
in contrast, the ibm and google designs are general-purpose quantum computers, and can be used for a wider variety of calculations, including integer factorization—a type of operation necessary to break rsa encryption.
various types of qubit designs exist in general-purpose quantum computers, including superconducting qubits, ion-trap systems, semiconductor-based and spin qubits.
a standard for measuring the computational ability of quantum computers was proposed by ibm in 2017, called "quantum volume."
quantum volume is measured by calculating the number of physical qubits, connectivity between qubits, and time to decoherence, as well as the available hardware gate set, and number of operations that can be run in parallel.
according to the researchers who defined quantum volume, that metric "enables the comparison of hardware with widely different performance characteristics and quantifies the complexity of algorithms that can be run."
likewise, the researchers noted that quantum volume can only increase if the number of qubits, and the error rate of those qubits, increase in parallel.
on monday, at gartner's catalyst conference in san diego, the research and advisory firm embraced the quantum volume benchmark as an important way of measuring progress toward quantum advantage—the point at which quantum computers are capable of performing a calculation demonstrably faster than traditional computers—and noted the importance of quantum volume in planning for adoption of quantum computers.
while it is presently unclear when quantum advantage will be achieved, gartner projects evaluation of quantum use cases in the enterprise by 2022, with early quantum applications in deployment by 2026, and commercial use of quantum computing by 2030.
for more on quantum computing, check out "why post-quantum encryption will be critical to protect current classical computers," "ibm reduces noise in quantum computing, increasing accuracy of calculations," "d-wave's 2000q variant reduces noise for cloud-based quantum computing," and "quantum computing is not a cure-all for business computing challenges" on techrepublic.
also see
tübingen university physicists are the first to link atoms and superconductors in key step towards new hardware for quantum computers and networks.
today's quantum technologies are set to revolutionize information processing, communications, and sensor technology in the coming decades.
the basic building blocks of future quantum processors are, for example, atoms, superconducting quantum electronic circuits, spin crystals in diamonds, and photons.
in recent years it has become clear that none of these quantum building blocks is able to meet all the requirements such as receiving and storing quantum signals, processing and transmitting them.
a research group headed by professors józsef fortágh, reinhold kleiner and dieter kölle of the university of tübingen institute of physics has succeeded in linking magnetically-stored atoms on a chip with a superconducting microwave resonator.
the linking of these two building blocks is a significant step towards the construction of a hybrid quantum system of atoms and superconductors which will enable the further development of quantum processors and quantum networks.
the study has been published in the latest nature communications.
quantum states allow especially efficient algorithms which far outstrip the conventional options to date.
quantum communications protocols enable, in principle, unhackable data exchange.
quantum sensors yield the most precise physical measurement data.
"to apply these new technologies in everyday life, we have to develop fundamentally new hardware components," fortágh says.
instead of the conventional signals used in today's technology -- bits -- which can only be a one or a zero, the new hardware will have to process far more complex quantum entangled states.
"we can only achieve full functionality via the combination of different quantum building blocks," fortágh explains.
in this way, fast calculations can be made using superconducting circuits; however storage is only possible on very short time scales.
neutral atoms hovering over a chip's surface, due to their low strength for interactions with their environment, are ideal for quantum storage, and as emitters of photons for signal transmission.
for this reason, the researchers connected two components to make a hybrid in their latest study.
the hybrid quantum system combines nature's smallest quantum electronic building blocks -- atoms -- with artificial circuits -- the superconducting microwave resonators.
"we use the functionality and advantages of both components," says the study's lead author, dr. helge hattermann, "the combination of the two unequal quantum systems could enable us to create a real quantum processor with superconducting quantum lattices, atomic quantum storage, and photonic qubits."
qubits are -- analogous to bits in conventional computing -- the smallest unit of quantum signals.
the new hybrid system for future quantum processors and their networks forms a parallel with today's technology, which is also a hybrid, as a look at your computer hardware shows: calculations are made by microelectronic circuits; information is stored on magnetic media, and data is carried through fiber-optic cables via the internet.
"future quantum computers and their networks will operate on this analogy -- requiring a hybrid approach and interdisciplinary research and development for full functionality," fortágh says.
